# Introduction
## Kant's Transcendental Deduction: A Somewhat Deep-Seated Reflection

*Source: Alison Laywine, Kant's Transcendental Deduction: A Cosmology of Experience (Oxford University Press, 2020).*

---

This book undertakes a study of the Transcendental Deduction in the *Critique of Pure Reason*—'a somewhat deep-seated reflection',[^1] as Kant characterizes it in the preface to the first edition (AXVI). Such studies have been undertaken before, but I believe I can shed new light on the argument. I might justify my claim by saying that I have taken account of Kant's earlier writings—and not only those published in his lifetime. That is at least part of what is distinctive about my study. But other people have done so too, and contributed much to our understanding of the text. A notable example is Hermann de Vleeschauwer's three volume book, *La déduction transcendantale*.[^2] So too Henry Allison's more recent contribution by the same title (in English), stylized in the sub-title as 'an analytical-historical commentary'.[^3]

If I can claim to have contributed anything, it will be by finding and elaborating points of contact between the Transcendental Deduction and Kant's earlier writings that have not been noticed before or that have not been taken as seriously as perhaps they should be. The upshot is that I take the Transcendental Deduction to be a reinterpretation of Kant's early metaphysics.

This claim, so far as it goes, is not news. In the preface to the first edition, Kant himself explicitly encourages his reader to expect a reappraisal of metaphysics as the outcome of the Critique. He characterizes his undertaking 'not as a critique of books and systems, but rather that of the faculty of reason itself with respect to all knowledge it may seek independent of all experience, and hence the deciding of the possibility or impossibility of a metaphysics as such and the determining of its sources and boundaries' (AXII). A few pages later, he associates the task of deciding 'the possibility or impossibility of a metaphysics as such' with that of the Deduction. For he says that the Deduction addresses the 'central question' of the Critique as a whole: 'what and how much can be known by reason and understanding, independent of all experience' (AXVII). Since the Deduction is supposed to establish, among other things, that the understanding cannot apply its pure concepts a priori to things in themselves, but only to what may be sensibly given to us, it leads to the conclusion that 'a metaphysics as such' is not possible, at least not on the assumption that metaphysics is a science of non-sensible things. This reappraisal is then reinforced in the Transcendental Dialectic, which tries to show in detail that the ideas of reason, when taken to apply dogmatically to non-sensible things, generate different kinds of fallacies.

Even after we have recalled these familiar points in the Critique, much remains to be said about the significance of the Transcendental Deduction for metaphysics, as Kant understood it, and the other way round. The project of this book is, at least in part, to spell this out. But before it can get underway, we must understand more precisely what Kant took metaphysics to be. Otherwise we and Kant run the risk of talking past each other.

## Paton, Bradley, and Kant on Metaphysics

Here is a case in point.

I might very well have chosen as the title of this book: *Kant's Metaphysics of Experience*. For that would have captured what this book is about, since it captures what I take the Deduction to be about. But that title is already spoken for. It is the one that H. J. Paton picked for his book in 1936.[^4] When I speak of 'Kant's metaphysics of experience', I have something specific in mind. Surely Paton does too. But what that could be is not immediately obvious, because he does not say! He lays out in the introduction his reasons for rejecting the so-called 'Patchwork Theory', the view defended by Adickes, Vaihinger, and Kemp-Smith according to which the Critique was written hastily by stitching together earlier arguments and sketches of arguments jotted down here and there over a long period of time. But Paton does nothing to explain how we should understand his use of the word 'metaphysics', much less the expression 'metaphysics of experience'. Nor does he offer any explanation in the opening chapters of Book One. The heading of Book One is 'Kant's Problem', which naturally raises the expectation that Paton will start by motivating Kant's project and therefore his own. So he does. But his silence on 'metaphysics' even here suggests that he must have thought the meaning of this word would be obvious. This in turn suggests that we may have a valuable clue to his thinking in the heading of the first chapter of Book One, which is: 'Appearance and Reality'. For we recognize this heading as the title of the famous book by Bradley.

It then seems likely that Paton took 'metaphysics' in Bradley's sense. Bradley characterizes metaphysics tentatively as follows: 'We may agree, perhaps, to understand by metaphysics an attempt to know reality as against mere appearance, or the study of first principles or ultimate truths, or again the effort to comprehend the universe, not simply piecemeal or by fragments, but somehow as a whole.'[^5] The first part of Bradley's book is devoted to appearance: it proceeds from one dilemma to another; it ultimately concludes that the dilemmas are intractable and that the world contradicts itself and so must count as appearance and not reality. The destructive first part of the book then paves the way to the lengthier second part whose task is to figure out positively and constructively how reality as such ought to be understood.

I think it likely that Paton was trying to use Kant to set this project on its head. The idea would be something like this. Kant was engaged in metaphysics in Bradley's sense. But he mounted a coherent argument (and not a crazy quilt of badly stitched together jottings) designed to show that reality—as Bradley seems to have understood it—is fraught with fallacy and paradox and that appearance is immune to these problems. Hence, what metaphysics teaches us is that we can hope to make progress understanding appearance, but never 'reality'. And that lesson is what makes Kant's metaphysics a 'metaphysics of experience'.[^6]

I see no reason to quarrel with Bradley and Paton on their use of 'metaphysics'. They were free to frame the terms of their debate as they saw fit. But Kant himself had something quite else in mind. To be sure, there is a point of contact between his understanding of metaphysics and theirs. It is suggested by the brief passages I quoted earlier from the first edition of the Critique. For we saw that he explicitly associates the fate of metaphysics with the question 'what and how much can be known by reason and understanding, independent of all experience'. Where we discover a distinction between what can be known independent of experience and what cannot, we may well expect a complementary distinction between appearance and reality. But that distinction as such is not what Kant meant by 'metaphysics', even if he himself might be understood to have embraced it or something like it. This matters for my purposes.

## Baumgarten and the Structure of Metaphysics

Metaphysics was, of course, a part of philosophy for Kant. His thinking about it was informed by Alexander Baumgarten's handbook on the subject. Baumgarten defines metaphysics as 'the science of the first principles in human cognition' (§1).[^7] This formulation all by itself might well be taken to resonate sympathetically with the characterization of metaphysics as 'the study of principles or ultimate truths' I quoted earlier from Bradley's *Appearance and Reality*. But there is at least one important point of disagreement between the two philosophers, and quite likely between Kant and Paton, for that matter.

Metaphysics is a single science, for Baumgarten, but it has internal divisions, corresponding to differences of object: 'traced back to metaphysics [sc. as its parts—AL] are ontology, cosmology, psychology and natural theology' (§2). Ontology is 'the science of the general predicates of being' (§4), i.e., the first principles of human knowledge (§5) which apply to everything and anything. That is what makes ontology 'general metaphysics', as opposed to any of the 'special' branches of metaphysics. The special branches of metaphysics are respectively the sciences of some particular, intelligible object. Natural theology is the science of divinity, elaborated by human reason unaided by revelation. Rational psychology is the science of the human rational soul, elaborated by human reason independently of empirical psychology. General cosmology is the science of worlds as such. It is not concerned with some particular world, like the one of which we happen to be parts, but rather the intelligible principles that would make possible any world as such. Hence, it is independent of, and prior to, the physical sciences that are all concerned one way or another with body and matter as constitutive elements of this world. For Bradley, by contrast, the idea that there might be more than one intelligible object of metaphysics and that therefore metaphysics has internal divisions is nonsense. There can be only one reality. It is the single, ultimate object of metaphysics,[^8] i.e., after metaphysics has taught us how to distinguish that reality from appearance. I take Paton to agree, at least to the extent of denying that metaphysics has more than one object. Assuming that Bradley was wrong and Kant was right, he would surely say that the only object metaphysics can study positively is 'experience': but there is only one experience; it does not have internal divisions.

Baumgarten's threefold division of special metaphysics according to its objects is certainly reflected in Kant's presentation of the Transcendental Dialectic: the second book of the Dialectic has three 'Hauptstücke', each devoted to one of the three special branches of metaphysics. But the Dialectic is supposed to show that there can be no knowledge of God, soul, or world independent of experience. This suggests that Kant himself must have given up Baumgarten's conception of metaphysics by the 1780s, even if he had embraced it before then. At any rate, it indicates that he had given up on special metaphysics, at least as Baumgarten understood it. Hence, it would seem that the only part of Baumgarten's programme Kant could have remained positively committed to in the 1780s and thereafter was general metaphysics. That idea, or something like it, has been floated before, notably by Martin Heidegger in *Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik*. It might be thought, then, that I am trying to revive this account of Kant's 'metaphysics of experience' rather than Paton's. But that is not the case.

## Heidegger and the Critique

Unlike Paton, Heidegger understood and took seriously Kant's relation to Baumgarten's programme for metaphysics. The *Critique of Pure Reason* was supposed to be, on his reading, a radicalization of this programme from within.

The Heideggerian story starts with the by now familiar distinction between general and special metaphysics. But this distinction is supposed to cash out as a distinction between ontology and 'ontic' knowledge. Ontic knowledge is about the 'things that are' (*die Seienden*), namely the ones of greatest concern to us given that we understand ourselves as finite beings with hopes for an afterlife, situated in creation as a whole by the divine being who brought us into existence. Thus God, the human rational soul and the world as such are 'the things that are' of greatest concern to us. This gives us the by now familiar threefold division of special metaphysics into natural theology, rational psychology, and general cosmology. But precisely because these disciplines reflect our most significant concerns, they aspire to the greatest possible rigour, certainty, and dignity. Hence, they must be grounded on an appropriate philosophical infrastructure, namely ontology understood as the discipline that determines in a universal way the being of the things that are: *das Sein der Seienden*. Without this infrastructure, our hopes of philosophically elaborating our insights into the objects of greatest concern to us will fall to pieces. Even for Wolff and Baumgarten, then, the prospects of successfully developing special metaphysics will turn on how successfully we have developed our general metaphysics. Kant's great merit, according to Heidegger, was to recognize that Wolff and Baumgarten had failed to deliver on their promise. For ontology, as they conceived it, treats the being of the things that are as just one more of the many things that are. Their ontology could never serve as a grounding of ontic knowledge, because it took its cue from ontic knowledge and implicitly understood itself in light of such knowledge. It used as a crutch the very things it was supposed to shore up. Kant's project was thus to investigate the possibility of a genuinely ontological ontology—an ontology purged of its ontic false consciousness.[^9]

There is no doubt that Heidegger offers a salutary correction to the Marburg Neo-Kantian reading of the first Critique. Hermann Cohen argued that the central concern of the Critique was to establish the *Geltung* of the exact sciences.[^10] An important consequence of Cohen's reading was to strip Kantian philosophy of its obvious interest in Wolffian metaphysics. This gives a false picture of the Critique. The exact sciences were indeed of obvious interest to Kant, but the one interest did not preclude the other. Moreover, Heidegger is right to point out that Kant did not regard Wolffian metaphysics as something I will call a 'mere failure'. If a philosophical programme proves to be a 'mere failure' for whatever reason, the appropriate response is to abandon it and move on to something else. On Cohen's reading of the Critique, Kant abandoned Wolffian metaphysics, because he regarded it as a 'mere failure', and he turned to the exact sciences and the problem of their *Geltung*, because he thought that would be more promising. But some projects in philosophy are not failures 'merely'. They are what I will call 'signal failures': ones that suggest we should probe deeper and that therefore prove to be opportunities to learn something important. According to Heidegger, Kant took Wolffian metaphysics to be a signal failure. The question is what he thought we could learn from it.

Heidegger's answer is this. Kant recognized that there could be no genuinely ontological ontology stripped of its ontic false consciousness, unless the enquiry were directed towards its very source, namely the being, *ens*, thing or *Dasein* whose special concerns are on display in the three branches of special metaphysics. Kant produced a proto-analytic of Dasein by revealing the conditions of our finitude, i.e., the role played by the productive imagination in somehow mediating between human sensibility and the requirements of our finite understanding.

I agree with Heidegger that Kant took Baumgarten's project for metaphysics to be a signal failure and hence an opportunity to probe deeper. But I disagree with him on three things. First of all, Heidegger's claim that Kant carried out a proto-analytic of Dasein gives a picture of the Critique that is just as false as Cohen's. The textual evidence does not, on balance, support his reading. Second of all, Heidegger takes a much too 'take-it-or-leave-it' position: either Kant is engaging with metaphysics, or he is doing *Erkenntnistheorie*. The disjunction here is exclusive. I think that that is a mistake. For Kant, metaphysics and something we might as well call *Erkenntnistheorie* are inextricably entwined. Third and most important of all, I think that the relation between special and general metaphysics is much more complicated and much more interesting than Heidegger realizes.

## General Cosmology and the Duisburg Nachlaß

I will argue that the Transcendental Deduction reflects Kant's engagement with special metaphysics before 1780 in the most fundamental way, namely in the conception of the understanding and its relation to appearances that emerges by the end of the Deduction (in both editions). This conception is informed by the early Kant's general cosmology.

As we have seen, general cosmology was that branch of special metaphysics whose task was to explain what it is to be a world and how a world as such is possible. For the early Kant, a world is the collection of all creatures: it exhibits unity insofar as these creatures externally relate to one another; this depends, in turn, on the way God decided to govern his creation. The underlying assumption is that God's intellect and God's will are perfect in every way. God's will exhibits its perfection not only by exercising the supreme power at its disposal, but also by conforming to the supremely wise judgements of God's intellect. This assumption is naturally controversial. It would be rejected by divine voluntarists, like Samuel Clarke, who would say that God elects to do what he does, just because it pleases him and not because it is intrinsically wise. But the assumption also ensures that God's government of creation is supremely rational; this ensures that human philosophers can evaluate it on rational grounds. Granted, we cannot understand everything, for we too are creatures. Still we are creatures possessed of intellect: we know in principle, if not in detail, what can ideally be expected of an intellect—even an intellect in the state of greatest perfection. That means general cosmology is possible. For we can reconstruct, after the fact, how God might conceive and organize a world out of the collection of creatures he brought into existence.

Heidegger would say that our concern for salvation is what ultimately lies behind general cosmology and the rest of Wolffian metaphysics.[^11] For all I know, he may be right—at the very end of the day. But sometime around noon, we should stop and notice that what is immediately at issue is the intelligibility of the world and our own capacity to make sense of it. This matters, because it is also a concern of ours to understand what there is to understand: just because it is intrinsically interesting. It is hard to imagine what could be more intrinsically interesting than the principle underlying the possibility of a world as such, since that principle would give our intellect the greatest scope to apply itself. You and I might very well prefer to investigate some given part of the world, rather than the world as a whole. But it might be argued that general cosmology should matter even to the two of us. For unless you and I take seriously the thought that the thing of interest to us is indeed a part of the world as a whole and investigate its place in it, our understanding of this thing will remain radically incomplete. Thus, for Wolff, rational psychology is the study of the human rational soul. But it presupposes general cosmology, just to the extent that the human rational soul is a part of a world and not a world unto itself.[^12] General cosmology matters, therefore, just because we would like to satisfy our curiosity. I believe it mattered to Kant for this very reason, and no doubt to Wolff and Baumgarten as well.

Kant distinguished himself from the other metaphysicians, however, in trying to use or reinterpret central notions of general cosmology in order to shed light on the conditions of human knowledge. Thus general cosmology and something we might just as well call *Erkenntnistheorie* became inextricably entwined for him. Our first indication of this is the inaugural dissertation of 1770. It is reflected in the very title of the work: *De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis* ('concerning the form and principles of the sensible world and the intelligible world'). Thus sensible things are supposed to form a world insofar as they are subject to the conditions of human sensibility. Intelligible things are supposed to form a world insofar as they (and presumably our own intellect) are subject to the ultimate conditions of intelligibility: God as creator and regent of the world as it is in itself. This overtly cosmological presentation was meant to advance the larger goal of the dissertation, which was to prevent so-called 'metaphysical errors of subreption': the false representation of intelligible, immaterial things as though subject to the conditions of sensibility and therefore as though knowable by us under the same conditions as physical bodies. If one could determine the 'form and principles' of each of these worlds respectively, it would be possible in theory to assign the various objects of our knowledge a place in the appropriate world. For example, bodies and bodily forces are subject to the conditions of space and time and therefore have a place in the so-called sensible world; hence, they are knowable by us under the conditions of sensibility. But the human rational soul, as an immaterial substance, is the object of the intellect, and hence it has no place in the world governed by the conditions of sensibility; hence, it may not be represented as subject to the conditions of space and time. That, at least, was supposed to be the larger lesson of the dissertation.

Now one might have thought that the cosmological presentation of the inaugural dissertation was a passing 'phase' that reflects a short window in Kant's academic life when he had to write up quickly a set piece for the purposes of officially taking up the professorship in metaphysics and logic at the university in Königsberg. The so-called 'intelligible world' ceases to play any significant role in Kant's later published writings in theoretical philosophy, whatever might be said about its role in his conception of the kingdom of ends in practical philosophy. When it comes up in passing in the first Critique, Kant seems concerned not only to deny the notion of an 'intelligible thing' or 'noumenon' any other status than that of a 'problematic concept' 'that serves only as an empty space for restricting empirical principles without however containing or indicating any object of knowledge beyond the sphere of the latter' (A259–260/B315). He also seems to deny that the talk about worlds, even in this context, has any genuine cosmological significance. Thus he says in a footnote added in the second edition to the section called 'Distinction of All Objects into Phaenomena and Noumena': 'one need not use, in place of [the Latin expression *mundus sensibilis atque intelligibilis*] the [translated] expression "intellectual world" as is the custom in German disquisitions [sc. where the expression "intellectuelle Welt" is used—AL]. For only items of knowledge are intellectual or sensitive' (B312). The point here seems to be that talk of worlds ultimately cashes out as the distinction between phaenomena and noumena. But to make sense of that distinction in the right way, we can (and maybe should) do without the world talk altogether.

On balance, though, these considerations do not tell against my proposal in this book.[^13] The overwhelming evidence indicates that the notion of a world played a very important role, first of all, in the historical development of Kant's conception of the understanding as a faculty of knowledge and, second of all, in the systematic elaboration of the Deduction itself.

The historical evidence includes a document that can probably be dated as a whole to the mid-1770s: the so-called Duisburg Nachlaß, a collection of loose leaves Kant used to write up his ideas. The Duisburg Nachlaß pretty clearly revolves around a couple of related themes, issues or questions. How is empirical thought possible? How are appearances made objective? How are appearances converted into experience? The answers to these questions always seem to converge on the following idea: the relations of the mind to itself and the thoughts that it thinks are used by the mind to impose a priori some kind of order or unity on appearances that would otherwise be impossible. How it does this is not altogether clear. But what is very clear indeed, and surprisingly so given the fragmentary and tentative character of the Duisburg Nachlaß, is the nature of this order or unity. For it faithfully and unmistakably replicates the order or unity that the early Kant claimed to be essentially constitutive of a world as such. We can see this very clearly if we patiently read through the Duisburg Nachlaß in light of the general cosmological reflections in the inaugural dissertation of 1770 and the *Nova dilucidatio* of 1755. This has been missed in the scant literature on the Duisburg Nachlaß, because the temptation has always been to assume that Kant had simply outgrown his early metaphysics by the mid-1770s. But it is worth carrying out the exercise not just for the sake of clarifying one of the few things that really can be clarified about the Duisburg Nachlaß, but also for the light it throws on Kant's thinking about thinking.

Thinking about appearances is supposed to yield experience. But experience, according to the Duisburg Nachlaß, is not just a matter of sorting appearances into kinds. In other words, it is not the result of the mere 'logical use' of the intellect, as claimed in the inaugural dissertation. It is rather the result of somehow construing appearances as belonging to a spatio-temporal world order. Of course, the inaugural dissertation already had the idea of a sensible world, as distinct from the intelligible world. But it is naturally read as saying that the foundation of the sensible world rests on the conditions of human sensibility. The Duisburg Nachlaß does not deny that these conditions are necessary for the spatio-temporal world order it equates with experience. For experience comes to be out of appearances; and, nothing can appear to us except under these conditions. But, unlike the inaugural dissertation, the Duisburg Nachlaß explicitly denies that the conditions of sensibility are the foundation or cause of the worldliness of experience. It is rather an artefact of the understanding.

The Duisburg Nachlaß is thus a very peculiar exercise in general cosmology. The object of the exercise is not to reconstruct how God would ideally produce a world out of all the creatures he brought into existence, but rather how our own understanding produces a world in thought out of anything that can be given to our sensibility. It is natural to wonder how exactly Kant could have been thinking of the exercise.

The answer starts, as it did before, with our concern to understand as much of whatever there is to understand as possible. That is potentially a whole world's worth of stuff. But by 1770, Kant had recognized that much of what we might want to understand is sensibly given to us and hence cannot be directly grasped by the understanding. The understanding can directly grasp only that which is immediately intelligible; the only things immediately intelligible to us are things in themselves. Hence, there is a whole sensible world's worth of appearances we would in principle like to understand. But understanding any of them will take work. That work cannot be carried out for us by God, precisely because the things of interest here are sensibly given to us and not to him. It also cannot be carried out for us by sensibility, precisely because sensibility is not a faculty for understanding anything: it only makes possible the appearing to us of anything that appears to us at all. So the work that needs to be done has to be done by the understanding itself. It cannot simply involve cataloguing all the different kinds of things that are sensibly given to us. For even if we could be sure how to draw up this catalogue and even if we could be sure that the catalogue is complete, we would still not understand, even in a general way, how in principle the items in our catalogue externally relate to one another. The task for our understanding must then be to draw out of its own intellectual resources the principles that govern these relations. But providing the principles that in general make it possible for all possible appearances to externally relate to one another is just what will convert all possible appearances into a whole that exhibits unity and order: if we get the principles right, we will have intellectual command, as it were, over all the sensible things of potential interest to us, and we will not have to worry that different sets of these things will belong to parallel worlds, much less that they will collectively amount to nothing more than a giant heap, stash or something less even than a dream. Hence, we will have built up out of appearances the sensible world in thought. General cosmology is thus no longer a special branch of metaphysics in the Duisburg Nachlaß; it just is the activity of our understanding: it is nothing less than thinking, as directed towards appearances.

This is what leads me to say that, for Kant, the relationship between general and special metaphysics is much more complicated and more interesting than Heidegger realized. The Duisburg Nachlaß can be understood to contribute something to general metaphysics, at least insofar as it spells out the resources we have for thinking appearances. But it makes this contribution by giving this part of general metaphysics a special metaphysical cash value, i.e., it explicitly treats the relevant part of general metaphysics as a general cosmology of experience. Heidegger would have deplored this move as an unfortunate relapse into ontic ways of thinking. But I can find no reason at all to agree with him here.

## From Duisburg to the Critique

My strategy in this book will be to compare and contrast the Duisburg Nachlaß and the Transcendental Deduction in the *Critique of Pure Reason*. I will argue that they have something very important in common, namely a strong and unmistakable commitment to this conception of the understanding as a world-builder and general cosmology as the activity of thinking directed towards appearances. But I will also stress important differences and use them to expose what I take to be distinctive of the Transcendental Deduction and Kant's mature theoretical philosophy in general.

For one thing, Kant still took for granted in the Duisburg Nachlaß that the human rational soul can have direct intellectual insight into itself: it thereby recognizes itself as a thinking substance with certain relations to itself and to its own thoughts. It converts this self-recognition into three pure concepts, which Kant once or twice calls 'categories' but more usually calls 'titles of the understanding'. They are the immediate ancestors of the three relational categories in the Critique. The mind uses them to formulate a priori three corresponding universal laws of nature. They in turn are the immediate ancestors of the Analogies of Experience. In the Duisburg Nachlaß, the mind converts appearances into experience by 'setting out' the external relations among them, in a unified spatio-temporal whole that exhibits worldhood, as representative cases or 'specifications' of these three universal laws. Reasonably precise meaning can be given to this talk of 'specifying' the universal laws of nature and 'setting out' the external relations of appearances in a world whole. As I will argue in §1 of Chapter One and §3 in Chapter Four, it depends ultimately on a simple, but technical point about the regimentation of proofs in classical geometry that Kant was to take up again in the Critique: both in the Transcendental Deduction and the System of Principles. For now, though, the key thing is just that, in the Duisburg Nachlaß, the application of the categories and their corresponding universal laws of nature to appearances ultimately depends on the human mind's direct intellectual recognition of itself as a simple, immaterial thinking substance. This recognition is the origin of the categories, and consequently the mind itself is their first object: because the categories apply to the mind, by formally expressing the truth about its nature, they apply a priori to appearances—indeed, to all possible appearances—and thus they are the conditions of possibility of experience.

The *Critique of Pure Reason* thus departs from the Duisburg Nachlaß on two main points. The first is the idea that the mind can have direct intellectual insight into anything at all. It is summarily rejected in the Transcendental Deduction where Kant allows for intellectual intuition in an understanding that can generate its own manifold by the mere thought or consciousness of itself, but denies that it is possible for an understanding like ours—one that must always receive its manifold under conditions of sensibility and then take it up into the synthetic unity of pure apperception (B135, B138–139). The second point on which the Critique departs from the Duisburg Nachlaß is the idea that the categories can apply to, and yield knowledge of, the human rational soul as an immaterial thinking substance. It is rejected in the section of the Critique on the Paralogisms.[^14]

These two points may well stand or fall together. Perhaps Kant came to reject the one after having found reasons to reject the other. But I do not know what those reasons were. They certainly could not have been the specific arguments against the Paralogisms in the *Critique of Pure Reason*, because these arguments are just too contrived to have played any role in the order of discovery. Beyond the claim I just made, I will not speculate further about how the discovery was made. I will say only that it must have been very significant to Kant, because an important motivation of the inaugural dissertation in 1770 had been to ensure that metaphysicians would not make the mistake of representing the human rational soul under conditions of sensibility. That programme made sense only on the assumption called into question by the Paralogisms—or, anyway, only on the related assumption that the pure intellect has its own, independent resources (whatever precisely they might be) for apprehending itself and its nature. Kant's younger self cared about this programme: he apparently believed by 1770 that he himself had made the relevant mistake in his earlier metaphysics and that he was now doing his best in the dissertation to correct it. At the time of the dissertation, he was wedded to the idea that we have some kind of pure, intellectual insight into the nature of the human rational soul. But between the writing of the Duisburg Nachlaß in the mid-1770s and the publication of the first edition of the Critique in 1781, he somehow discovered that he had been grievously mistaken. Once the discovery was made, however, he had to reconsider how the categories relate a priori to appearances. For he could no longer assume that they themselves could be elaborated out of the soul's intellectual insight into itself, nor then that they relate a priori to appearances just to the extent that they relate first of all to the soul itself. Indeed, he would have had to entertain the doubt—as perhaps he did not at the time of the Duisburg Nachlaß—that they might relate a priori neither to the mind that thinks, nor to appearances and hence that they might be—to use his own words at B123—'empty, null and without meaning'.

## The Cosmology of Experience in the Deduction

The purpose of the Transcendental Deduction is to put this very doubt to rest. We should not assume, however, that this meant abandoning the 'general cosmology of experience'. On the contrary, I will argue that Kant tried to carry out the Transcendental Deduction precisely by refitting and relaunching the general cosmology of experience he had tried unsuccessfully to set out in the Duisburg Nachlaß. This is plain in §26 of the B-Deduction (B159–165) and parallel passages at the end of the A-Deduction (A127–128) where Kant announces that the understanding is the source of the *Gesetzgebung der Natur*.

It is notorious that Kant claims in these passages that the understanding is a faculty that prescribes laws to nature and indeed makes nature possible. I take this claim to mean that Kant believes he has finally succeeded in mounting a cosmology of experience. The word 'nature' in this context has unmistakable, deliberate, cosmological connotations. I will argue that it just means 'world' in the sense of Kant's early cosmology, but translated into the terms of the critical philosophy.[^15] The talk of laws here is an essential part of the undertaking. It was central to Kant's early cosmology, precisely because he took a world as such to be a whole that exhibits unity. That unity was supposed to come from laws: you will not get a world just by having the totality of all creatures; a world comes to be only if these creatures are universally subject to laws of community that cause any given one of these creatures to relate to all the others. This, in a nutshell, was the argument of Section Three in the *Nova dilucidatio* of 1755 and Section Four in the inaugural dissertation of 1770. The laws at issue at the end of the Transcendental Deduction have the same cosmological function. They unify; they do so universally. But they apply only to things as they appear to us and not to things as they are in themselves.

Now it might be said—and Kant would certainly agree—that all laws unify in some sense of the word: even the special laws of nature that we can discover empirically. An example would be the empirical law that water freezes at a certain temperature and boils at another. This law unifies all that counts as water. All the water in the Saint Lawrence Seaway, all the water in the Tigris and the Euphrates and all water everywhere obeys this law: now, in the near and distant past, and for all time. But the law that governs change of state in water can unify only water. The other empirically discoverable, special laws of nature are just as limited in scope. These laws cannot have a cosmological function. They cannot unite all things and stuffs into a single world or even a single world-fragment. Hence, the cosmologically significant laws at issue at the end of the Transcendental Deduction cannot be discovered empirically. They apply universally to anything that can be sensibly given to us. That means they apply a priori. It also means that they have no special content that restricts their application to one kind of stuff rather than another. But, then, we will wonder what sort of law they could possibly be. The answer seems to be this. They are just whatever acts of the understanding will enable the productive imagination to elaborate out of the manifold sensibly given to us a spatio-temporal world fragment that will allow us to chart our way through our own thoughts. These acts of the understanding are supposed to coincide with the categories—more specifically with the relational categories, as I will argue in the end.

The central claim of my book is not merely that the Transcendental Deduction culminates with a reinterpretation and reappropriation of Kant's early general cosmology. It is that this reappropriation of the general cosmology is actually doing some work in the argument: a lot of hard work, in fact. The task of the Transcendental Deduction is to put to rest the doubt that the categories or pure concepts of the understanding do not relate a priori to anything at all. The strategy for putting this doubt to rest is supposed to consist in showing that the categories are the formal conditions of thought in the same way that the pure intuitions of space and time are the formal conditions of sensibility: just as nothing can be sensibly given to us unless it be given to us in space and time construed in the right way, so nothing can be thought by us unless our thinking be subject to the categories. Suppose, now, that we cannot entertain any thought unless we are able to think of the objects of our thought as situated in the world, i.e., as that world is built up by us in thought out of whatever is given to our sensibility. Suppose that this is true even for our most general thoughts: those that concern not the events in the life of—say—Rufus, my favourite erstwhile alley cat, but those that concern cats as a species or even the Cat Itself, with Itself, by Itself. In other words, suppose that even our most general and abstract thoughts can only be elaborated against the background of thoughts we have had about matters of interest to us as they have played out in the world in the sense just indicated. Finally, let's suppose that there is no way of coherently elaborating a world in thought, unless whatever is given to our sensibility is subject to the categories. Then, it will follow that the categories relate a priori to all the objects of experience—i.e., those things that are both given to us and thought by us—and indeed to anything at all that can appear to us. For nothing can appear to us, without being taken up by the categories in the ongoing effort of the understanding to make a world out of what is given to us: in the interest of providing us with a context for our thoughts. If this little sketch is on target, the cosmological resonances at the end of the Transcendental Deduction are not a vestigial throwback to an earlier period of Kant's thinking, as useless to the argument as the appendix in a living human body. It is, as Kant deliberately intended, an essential part of the argument.

Having said that, however, I do not wish to convey the idea that the cosmology of experience in the Transcendental Deduction is the same as that in Duisburg Nachlaß. There are indeed points of contact between them. But I will use those points of contact to explore the differences. The interest of the Transcendental Deduction is in part the way it has been ingeniously adapted to deal with the problems and deficiencies of the earlier material. Kant tries to mount a new and improved cosmology of experience in the Critique without appeal to the mind's direct intellectual recognition of itself as an immaterial, thinking substance. For one thing, he reconsiders apperception, the capacity associated with the mind's self-recognition in the Duisburg Nachlaß; for another, he reconsiders the relation between knowledge and its objects. He also introduces the faculty of productive imagination and tries to account for the role of image-making in discursive thought as directed towards appearances. These are some of the most significant changes to the cosmology of experience in the Transcendental Deduction. I will try to show what contribution they make to its programme and argument.

## Plan of the Book

Let me add that I will be taking account of both the A and the B versions of the Deduction. But the B version will be the focus throughout this book. This is partly because the B version is more perspicuous. But it is also to shut down the following objection: namely that the metaphysical aspects in the Deduction to which I am calling the reader's attention are infelicities of the A version that are subsequently ironed out in the B version. It would be a mistake to think such a thing. I will show that the cosmology of experience is essential to Kant's revised statement of the argument in 1787 and hence to the Transcendental Deduction as such.

The focus on the B version informs the structure of my book. Chapter One will be on the Duisburg Nachlaß. Chapters Two and Three will be devoted to the first part of the B-Deduction. Chapter Two will take us from §15 to §17; Chapter Three will take us from §18 to §21. These sections of the B-Deduction are not overtly cosmological. They aim, in the first instance, to lay bare the conditions of discursive thought. Chapters Four and Five—the remaining two chapters of my book—will cover the second part of the B-Deduction where the cosmology of experience comes sharply into focus. The second part of the B-Deduction aims to show that discursive thinking would be impossible without a cosmology of experience: since the categories make this cosmology possible, they are the formal conditions of all thinking and thus have title to appearances. Chapter Four will handle the cosmology of experience in §26. Chapter Five will focus on the problem of empirical self-knowledge raised in §24 and §25. My order of presentation in these two chapters will diverge from Kant's. But I believe that the divergence is justified because, for Kant, the cosmology of experience in §26 is just as essential for empirical knowledge of myself as it is for empirical knowledge of anything else: I cannot have empirical knowledge of myself except as a part of the sensible world. In my view, Kant's order of presentation in the second step of the B-Deduction shows bad judgement. In the conclusion to my book, I will show in outline how the cosmology of experience—the foundations of which are laid in the Transcendental Deduction—is completed in the System of Principles.

The next last thing to say before getting underway is this. For my purposes, Karl Ameriks' contribution to the *Cambridge Companion to Kant* in 1992[^16] was, and still is, a significant point of reference. 'The Critique of Metaphysics: Kant and Traditional Ontology' is a statement of observations about Kant's attitude towards metaphysics that Ameriks made as he helped edit and translate Kant's lectures on metaphysics for Cambridge University Press. His co-editor and co-translator was Steve Naragon.

Even before Ameriks and Naragon began this work, we all knew that Kant lectured on metaphysics until he retired in 1797. But Ameriks pointed out that these lectures show considerable continuity over the years, and indeed considerable continuity with Kant's earliest presentation of this material in his academic writings of the mid-1750s, notably the *Nova dilucidatio*. It is natural to think of Kant as Heinrich Heine portrayed him in *Religion und Philosophie in Deutschland*, namely as the Robespierre of metaphysics: the philosophical revolutionary who put the tyranny of metaphysics to the sword in the Transcendental Dialectic of the *Critique of Pure Reason*. The image is at once vivid, natural, and funny. But I take myself to have confirmed in detail Ameriks' thought that traditional metaphysics was not merely the topic of a service course Kant was required to give over and over again as part of his professorial duties in Königsberg. It continued to be very much alive in his thinking in the 1780s. The matter of interest, I submit, is how Kant came to see it as requiring a new interpretation, i.e., how he came to think of it not as a story about how things are in themselves, but rather as a story about the inner workings of our understanding as a faculty of knowledge.

Finally, I should like to alert the reader that all translations in this book are my own, unless otherwise indicated. This has the advantage of making clear to the reader how I understand the passages I quote. In the case of passages quoted from Kant, I have, where appropriate, indicated the volume number (from the so-called Academy edition of Kant's collected writings), the page number, and the line number. References to passages quoted from the first edition of the *Critique of Pure Reason* are to page number, prefaced by an 'A'; references to passages from the second edition are to page number, prefaced by a 'B'.

---

## Footnotes

[^1]: 'eine etwas tief angelegte Betrachtung'.
[^2]: De Vleeschauwer, *La Déduction transcendantale dans l'oeuvre de Kant* (Paris: Librairie Ernest Leroux, 1936).
[^3]: Allison, *Kant's Transcendental Deduction: an Analytical-Historical Commentary* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
[^4]: Herbert James Paton, *Kant's Metaphysics of Experience* in two volumes as reprinted by (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1997).
[^5]: Bradley, *Appearance and Reality* (London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co., 1893) 1, reprinted as an Elibron Classics by Adamant Media Corporation in 2005.
[^6]: It should be noted that Strawson too speaks of Kant's 'metaphysics of experience' in *The Bounds of Sense* (London/New York: Routledge, 1966). In fact, that is the heading of Part Two of his book. I have a harder time making sense of what Strawson has in mind, because he speaks in such broad generalities. He characterizes the task of the Critique as 'the investigation of that limiting framework of ideas and principles the use and application of which are essential to empirical knowledge, and which are implicit in any coherent conception of experience which we can form.' *Op. cit.*, 18. He goes on to say that should this investigation succeed, it would 'fully deserve the title of metaphysics' (Strawson, *Bounds of Sense*, 18). 'Metaphysics' here is short for 'metaphysics of experience'. What does Strawson mean by 'metaphysics'? He says only this: 'It [sc. Kant's investigation—AL] will be, as metaphysics was always said to be, the most general and fundamental of studies; and its method will be non-empirical, or a priori, not because, like transcendent metaphysics, it claims to be concerned with a realm of objects inaccessible to experience, but because it is concerned with the conceptual structure which is presupposed in all empirical inquiries.' (Strawson, *Bounds of Sense*, 18). So far as it goes, Strawson's claim here may well be true. The problem is just that it is vague. Quite possibly he means much the same thing as Paton; quite possibly Paton means nothing more than he (Strawson) does. By contrast, I believe that the notion of a metaphysics or cosmology of experience can be made reasonably precise and specific. By the time I am done, however, my reader may discern a sympathetic resonance in some of my conclusions with the Strawsonian idea that Kant was trying to set up some kind of global system or framework of spatio-temporal relations as the backdrop to all our empirical thinking and knowledge of objects. I ascribe this sympathetic resonance to Strawson's sensitivity to the elements in Kant's Transcendental Analytic that I will argue are best understood as adaptions by his critical philosophy of elements in his early general cosmology to which I will call the reader's attention as we go along.
[^7]: Alexander Baumgarten, *Metaphysica*, editio III (Halae Magdeburgicae: Impensis Carol. Herman. Hemmerde, 1750).
[^8]: A very interesting alternative, post-Kantian view can be found in Hermann Lotze whose *Metaphysik* reprises at least some of the pre-Kantian internal divisions of metaphysics according to its different objects. Thus the full title of his book is *Metaphysik, drei Bücher der Ontologie, Kosmologie und Psychologie*, ed. Georg Misch (Leipzig: Felix Meiner, 1912) 1–644. One is struck by the conspicuous absence of a natural theology.
[^9]: Martin Heidegger, *Gesamtausgabe* I. Abteilung, Band 3, *Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik* (Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1965) 15–26.
[^10]: Hermann Cohen, *Kants Theorie der Erfahrung*, zweite neubearbeitete Auflage (Berlin: Ferd. Dümmlers Verlagsbuchhandlung Harrwitz und Gossmann, 1885). Cohen lays out his programme for interpreting Kant in the introduction where he tries to situate the Critique in the history of philosophy. My characterization of his programme in this paragraph is crude in the interest of being succinct.
[^11]: Heidegger, *op. cit.*, 18.
[^12]: See notably §540 of Wolff's *Vernünfftige Gedancken von Gott, der Welt und der Seele des Menschen, auch allen Dingen überhaupt den Liebhabern der Wahrheit mitgetheilet* (Frankfurt/Leipzig: Renger?, 1738).
[^13]: Moreover, it may well be that, in context, Kant is making a quite limited remark at B312. He makes it sound as if talk of an intelligible world in German philosophical works was fairly common. I do not know whether it was or not. But it does appear in Lambert's *Anlage zur Architectonik* (Riga: bey Johann Friedrich Hartknoch, 1771) where it—that is, the German expression 'intellektuelle Welt'—has no genuine cosmological significance at all (1.1.29). Lambert uses the distinction between the 'intellectual world' and the 'corporeal world' just to signal that some of our knowledge is about immaterial things and some of it is about corporeal things. The same distinction can be found in §48 in the 'Alethiologie' of his *Neues Organon* (Leipzig: bey Johann Wendler, 1764). At B312 of the first Critique, Kant may just be observing that that distinction, so far as it goes, can perfectly well be made without the world talk. That, of itself, would not exclude the idea that thinking about worlds or the worldliness of experience may be essential to Kant's own enterprise in the Critique.
[^14]: Julian Wuerth argues in 'The Paralogisms of Pure Reason' in the *Cambridge Companion to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason* that, if one reads the Paralogism section of the first Critique carefully, one discovers that Kant does not deny that the categories apply a priori to the human mind or soul, but rather he denies that they do so in such a way as to give us any knowledge of ourselves. So far as it goes, I think that Wuerth must be right. But I do not yet fully understand what he takes this to mean at the end of the day. He says, in a number of places, that Kant still allows for the categories to have some 'ontological significance' with respect to the soul, i.e., they inform us somehow that the mind or soul is a thing in itself that counts as a simple substance. Nevertheless, this 'ontological significance' is not knowledge. I just do not understand why this should not count as knowledge. The problem here may well be one of finding the right formula to express the state of Kant's thinking in the Paralogisms. Wuerth says quite reasonably that Kant's agenda in the Paralogism section is to show that the categories do not yield the conclusions hoped for by rational psychology, namely that the soul is indestructible and immortal. That, of course, must be right. For now, let me just say that what matters for me is that Kant clearly and repeatedly denies in the Paralogism section of the first Critique that the categories apply a priori to the mind or soul in such a way as to yield knowledge of ourselves and that they are—to that extent—empty. There is no evidence that he took them to be empty in the Duisburg Nachlaß. There is evidence, indeed, that he took them to apply a priori to the mind or soul as a simple substance. And, I should point out, that the mini-Latin-language rational psychology that appears, in the Akademie Ausgabe, at the end of the Duisburg Nachlaß includes some of the controversial conclusions of rational psychology (AA17.672–673), whether stated in Kant's own voice or not is, of course, another question. So though I am very interested to discover, thanks to Wuerth's patient reading, a more nuanced picture in the Paralogism section, and some continuity between this part of the first Critique and Kant's earlier metaphysical psychology, I think I can still safely say that there is also a very significant difference between the Paralogisms and the Duisburg Nachlaß on this point: in the former, the categories are strictly speaking empty; in the latter, they are not. See Wuerth, 'The Paralogisms' in *Cambridge Companion*, ed. Paul Guyer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010) 210–44.
[^15]: That means, among other things, that 'nature' can never be a completed unified whole. Otherwise, we would be vulnerable to the antinomies. That is a crucial difference between the cosmology of experience in the first Critique and Kant's early general cosmology. Perhaps the way to think of nature in the first Critique is to characterize it as a universal world-whole in the making. At any given moment, we really only have a world fragment at our disposition. But we are always free and able to situate in thought this world fragment relative to others. The important thing here is just that the ultimate boundaries of nature in both space and time, and even the question whether there are any such boundaries in space or time or both, must remain open. I address these issues in greater detail in §1b of Chapter Four.
[^16]: *Cambridge Companion to Kant*, ed. Paul Guyer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
