The Path to the Principles
   Aristotle's Physics Alpha: Symposium Aristotelicum
Katerina Ierodiakonou, Paul Kalligas, and Vassilis Karasmanis
Print publication date: 2019
Print ISBN-13: 9780198830993
Published to Oxford Scholarship Online: July 2019 DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198830993.001.0001
The Path to the Principles
Physics I 1
Stephen Menn DOI:10.1093/oso/9780198830993.003.0002
Abstract and Keywords
Physics I 1 is a methodological introduction, not just to physics, but specifically to the investigation of principles. To gain scientific knowledge of nature, we must first determine its principles, but how do we determine these if we don’t know them already? This chapter distinguishes two readings of Aristotle’s claim that ‘at first it is rather confused things which are evident and clear to us, but afterwards, starting from these, the elements and principles become knowable when we divide these things’. On Reading A, we start by knowing compounds but not their elements. On Reading B, we start by knowing the compound more clearly than its elements, but also confusedly knowing the elements. We start by knowing the elements under universal descriptions and come to know them more clearly in substituting more particular descriptions. The chapter defends Reading B and show how it fits Aristotle’s procedure in Physics I and beyond.
Keywords: Aristotle, physics, methodology, principles, elements, universals, wholes
Physics I is an introduction to the Physics—perhaps just to Physics I–IV, perhaps to Physics I–VIII, perhaps to something even larger—and Physics I 1 is an introduction to Physics I. It is supposed to motivate, and to give methodological guidance for, the investigation of the ἀρχαί, and more specifically of the ἀρχαί of natural things. Unfortunately the chapter is more difficult, perhaps merely through extreme compression, than the book it is supposed to be introducing, and has left a legacy of puzzlement among ancient and medieval as well as modern commentators.1 The puzzlement has centred on Aristotle’s saying here
Page 1 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 that universals (τὰ καθόλου) are more knowable to us while particulars (τὰ καθ̓ ἕκαστα) are more knowable by nature, which is at least verbally the opposite of (p.20) what he says elsewhere. The chapter’s ambiguities and tensions may ultimately be such that it will not give us clear guidance for how to read the rest of the book. But working through the difficulties, both difficulties internal to Physics I 1 and difficulties about how its programme connects with what Aristotle actually does in Physics I and subsequent books, will at least alert us to interpretive issues that we should keep in mind in reading Physics I. I think that two popular proposals for resolving the difficulties of I 1—namely, that the root of the difficulty lies in Aristotle’s using the word καθόλου here in a nonstandard way, and that he is here just describing the methodology of physics in general, not book I’s investigation of form, matter, and privation—are both mistaken. Even if no alternative solution wins full conviction, there will be at least a negative benefit in not accepting a too easy solution. And I will make some positive suggestions, although I will probably not convince everyone.
I will divide Physics I 1 into three sections, 184a10–16, 184a16–23, and 184a23– b14, translating and commenting on each of them in turn. The first section is relatively uncontroversial. In the Physics, as in the Metaphysics and Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle begins with a general γνώμη about (theoretical or practical) knowledge, and then makes an argumentative transition to the discipline he is here concerned with. Thus:
General γνώμη: Since knowledge and scientific understanding (τὸ εἰδέναι καὶ τὸ ἐπίστασθαι) arise, in all disciplines which have ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα, from recognizing (γνωρίζειν) these (sc. ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα),
Supporting enthymeme: For we think that we know (γιγνώσκειν) each thing when we recognize (γνωρίζειν) [its] first causes and first ἀρχαί, as far as the στοιχεῖα,
Application to the present case: It is clear that within the science of nature too we must try to determine first [the part or the questions] concerning the ἀρχαί.
(184a10–16)
There are some puzzles here, which gave rise to differences of interpretation reported already in Simplicius’ commentary. It seems to be agreed that τὸ εἰδέναι καὶ τὸ ἐπίστασθαι restricts knowledge to ἐπιστήμη in the sense of the Posterior Analytics (whether we think, as Alexander seems to, that ἐπίστασθαι is one species of εἰδέναι, or, as Simplicius proposes, that εἰδέναι in the strict sense is being identified with ἐπίστασθαι)—whereas γνωρίζειν must be knowledge in a broader sense, or there would be an infinite regress.2 But then the apparently restrictive clause ‘in all disciplines which have ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα’ (p.
Page 2 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 21) seems odd: surely all sciences in the sense of the Posterior Analytics have ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα? (Or, more precisely, surely the objects known by these sciences have ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα.)3 So perhaps the clause is not really restrictive: perhaps those disciplines which have ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα are the disciplines in which ἐπιστήμη in the sense of the Posterior Analytics comes about (and perhaps only these are really disciplines (μέθοδοι)), and this is how such ἐπιστήμη comes about.4 Or, as both Alexander and Simplicius suggest in different ways, perhaps ἀρχαί and causes and στοιχεῖα are not synonymous, and while all sciences have at least one of these, not all sciences have all three. Simplicius takes Aristotle to be dividing ἀρχαί into causes-in-the-strict-sense and στοιχεῖα, and, surprisingly, construes ὧν εἰσὶν ἀρχαὶ ἢ αἴτια ἢ στοιχεῖα as ‘of which the ἀρχαί are either causes or στοιχεῖα’ or perhaps ‘of which there are ἀρχαί, either causes or στοιχεῖα’.5 But the basic thought remains unaltered by these disputes. First Aristotle says that all scientific knowledge comes from recognizing the ἀρχαί of things; then he applies this to the study of nature, infers that here too we will have scientific knowledge only once we have determined the ἀρχαί of natural things, and draws the practical conclusion that this is what we should devote ourselves to first.
There is no reason to expect that these ἀρχαί of natural things will be the ἀρχαί in the strict sense, the first of all things, the ἀρχαί and first causes of all things universally, which Metaphysics Α 1–2 says will be the objects of wisdom. (Or, if Speusippus is right that there are no first causes of all things universally, since natural things and unchanging things have different first causes, then the objects of wisdom will be the ἀρχαί of unchanging things, not the ἀρχαί of natural things. Only if there is nothing prior to natural things should we expect that the ἀρχαί of natural things will be the ἀρχαί in the strict sense.) So what are these ἀρχαί of natural things?
The most obvious answer is that they are the form, matter, and privation discussed in Physics I. Indeed, the last lines of Physics I, ‘let us thus have determined that there are ἀρχαί, and what they are, and how many in number; now let us make a new start and say’ (I 9, 192b2–4), seem to close off the investigation of the ἀρχαί of natural things announced in I 1, and to make a transition to something else in book II. This interpretation is also presupposed by Codex E, which gives book I the title περὶ ἀρχῶν and book II the contrasting title περὶ (p.22) αἰτίων.6 On this interpretation, book II would not be adding further ἀρχαί, but telling the physicist how to explain natural things by connecting them back to the ἀρχαί (ἀνάγειν εἰς τὰς ἀρχάς, II 3, 194b22–3), namely the ἀρχαί already discussed in book I, form and matter and privation.7 You might complain that this is too restrictive a list of ἀρχαί: why shouldn’t the efficient and final causes also count as ἀρχαί, especially since Aristotle commonly refers to the efficient cause as ἀρχὴ κινήσεως? But we might reply, drawing on Physics II 7, that the efficient and final causes do not give further natural ἀρχαί beyond matter and form, since your efficient cause is not strictly
Page 3 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 your father but your father’s soul, and this was already a formal ἀρχή (one and the same ἀρχή can be a formal and final cause of your father and also an efficient cause of you); and the first unmoved mover, which is not a formal ἀρχή, is not a nature or a natural thing, and so it is not a natural ἀρχή.8
Despite these indications in Physics I–II, Aristotle clearly sometimes thinks of the investigation of physical ἀρχαί as something broader than Physics I. De Caelo I 7 refers back, for a proof that there is no infinite body, to ‘our λόγοι ... ἐν τοῖς περὶ τὰς ἀρχάς: for there too already it was determined about the infinite, in what way it exists and in what way it does not exist’ (274a19–24). So on this conception Physics III is part of a broader Περὶ τὰς ἀρχάς extending beyond Physics I, and presumably including at least Physics I–IV. The first sentence of the Meteorology also presupposes something like this when it summarizes the Physics as περὶ τῶν πρώτων αἰτίων τῆς φύσεως (I–IV?) καὶ περὶ πάσης κινήσεως φυσικῆς (V–VIII?), before going on to the De Caelo; and Adrastus in On the Order of Aristotle’s Treatises says that some people entitle the first five books of the Physics Περὶ ἀρχῶν (Simplicius In Physica 4,11–15).9 And this conception (p.23)
of the task can be supported by texts of Physics III–IV which make clear that one motive for examining infinity and place and so on is that these things are at least plausibly thought to be ἀρχαί. (Thus ‘all those who seem to have touched on this kind of philosophy in a way worth mentioning have given an account of the infinite, and all of them posit it as an ἀρχή of the things that are’, III 4, 203a1–4; Aristotle argues against these philosophers that the infinite cannot be actual and an οὐσία, and therefore cannot be an ἀρχή, III 5, 204a20–1. In IV 1 he gives a plausible argument that place is ‘prior to all things’, i.e. that is an ἀρχή, since ‘that without which none of the other things exists, but it [can exist] without the others, must be first’, but it is plausible that anything that exists is in some place, and ‘the place does not perish when the things in it are destroyed’, 208b27–209a2; Aristotle suggests that this is why Hesiod made Chaos first.) The difference between Physics I and Physics III–IV cannot be that Physics I is about the real ἀρχαί of natural things while Physics III–IV are about things plausibly but wrongly thought to be ἀρχαί of natural things, since Physics I also considers proposed ἀρχαί that Aristotle will reject.
be out of the ἀρχαί in the strict sense. We might compare Lucretius book I, where only atoms are ἀρχαί in the strict sense, in Lucretius’ Latin the primordia rerum, but void and infinity are ἀρχαί in a broader sense, since if there were no void the atoms could not move, and if there were not an infinity of atoms, with infinite space and time to move in, the worlds would not arise from them.10
Page 4 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
Physics I is about things which are, or are thought to be, ἀρχαί in a stricter
So perhaps the difference is that
  sense, while Physics III–IV are about ἀρχαί in a broader sense, namely things
 which are (or are thought to be) necessary conditions of motion (so III 1,
 200b12–25), and are therefore things without which nothing else would come-to-
         
The Path to the Principles
 (p.24) One way Aristotle sometimes distinguishes the ἀρχαί of Physics I from ἀρχαί in a broader sense is to say that the ἀρχαί of Physics I, and only these, are στοιχεῖα. Many Greek philosophers, starting with Democritus, compare their ἀρχαί with the στοιχεῖα, the letters of the alphabet (or phonemes in speech), or even describe their ἀρχαί metaphorically as στοιχεῖα.11 But this way of describing the ἀρχαί entails a way of thinking about how they are related to other things: namely, that the ἀρχαί are present in or constituents of the things they are ἀρχαί of, as the στοιχεῖα are constituents of the συλλαβαί. And so Aristotle insists that some ἀρχαί are στοιχεῖα and others are not. The crucial difference between what Aristotle says about ἀρχαί in Metaphysics Δ 1 and what he says about στοιχεῖα in Δ 3 is that ‘of [ἀρχαί] some are ἐνυπάρχουσαι (present in, or constituents of, the thing they are ἀρχαί of ) and others are external’ (Δ 1, 1013a19–20), while ‘it is common to all that the στοιχεῖον of each thing is the first ἐνυπάρχον of each thing’ (Δ 3, 1014b14–15). Aristotle is consistent in drawing this distinction between ἀρχαί in general and στοιχεῖα in particular, but he is not consistent in how he applies it. Sometimes he applies it in such a way that the matter is a στοιχεῖον and form is not; and some ancient commentators assume that that is what Aristotle meant in Physics I 1, 184a11 and a13–14 in speaking both of ἀρχαί and of στοιχεῖα. But sometimes he applies the distinction in such a way that both matter and form are ‘constituents’ of a thing, and are therefore its στοιχεῖα, while notably its efficient cause is not; and some commentators assume that that is what he means in Physics I 1.
In Metaphysics Ζ 17 Aristotle uses the ἀρχή/στοιχεῖον distinction to solve the problem of the unity of a definition. A definition is a λόγος, and it is plausible to think of giving a thing’s λόγος as spelling it out into its στοιχεῖα. But there must be some cause why these στοιχεῖα are not just many things, but constitute a single ‘syllable’: if the λόγος leaves this out, then it is incomplete, and if this cause of unity must be added to the λόγος as a further στοιχεῖον, there will be an infinite regress. Aristotle solves the problem by saying that a (p.25) thing’s material constituents are its στοιχεῖα, and that the ‘syllable’ is not simply its στοιχεῖα but something over and above them, and the οὐσία of the syllable (which its definition must express) is whatever causes these στοιχεῖα to be this syllable. So the thing’s οὐσία is the cause of unity to its many στοιχεῖα, and if this cause were a further στοιχεῖον, or were composed of further στοιχεῖα, there would be a regress to a further cause of unity. So the οὐσία, i.e. the form, is a cause which ‘is not a στοιχεῖον but an ἀρχή: a στοιχεῖον is that into which [something] is divided, ἐνυπάρχον as matter, like α and β in the
syllable’ (1041b31–3).12 Eudemus and Alexander followed this lead in interpreting the ἀρχή/cause/στοιχεῖον distinction from Physics I 1, saying that στοιχεῖον here means the matter, that ἀρχή most properly means the source of motion, and that ‘cause’ most properly means the formal or final cause.13 So on this interpretation not all the ἀρχαί discussed in Physics I would be στοιχεῖα, but only the matter.
Page 5 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 However, in Metaphysics Λ 2–5 Aristotle argues that corruptible compound substances are not ‘out of’ eternal substances, i.e. do not have eternal substances as constituents, either as their matter or as their form,14 but that they do have other causes that lead up to eternal substances, namely the heavenly bodies and their movers. He expresses this by saying that, while the constituent στοιχεῖα of different kinds of things are not the same, except analogically the same, ‘as if someone were to say that there are three ἀρχαί, form and privation and matter’ (Λ 4, 1070b18–19), and while the στοιχεῖα of non-eternal things are non-eternal, nonetheless all things can share eternal non- constituent ἀρχαί.
Since not only the constituents (ἐνυπάρχοντα) are causes, but also some external things, like the mover, it is clear that ἀρχή and στοιχεῖον are different, and both are causes, and ἀρχή is divided into these (sc. into constituent and non-constituent), and the mover or what stops motion is not a στοιχεῖον, although it is an ἀρχή. So there are by analogy three στοιχεῖα, but four ἀρχαί and causes.
(Λ 4, 1070b22–6)15
(p.26) These ‘four causes’, in context, are not the standard four, but matter and form and privation and the external moving cause. The external moving cause can, like the matter and form, be specifically different for different species (my father and Bucephalus’), or numerically different for different individuals of the same species (my father and yours). But in some cases, where the moving cause is not conspecific with its effect, there can be a numerically single eternal cause for a whole species and across species, and even across categories. In this way ‘the sun and the oblique circuit’ (Λ 5, 1071a15–16) and ‘that which, as first of all things, moves all things’ (Λ 4, 1070b34–5) are causes of the generation of all sublunar substances, and even of accidents. Aristotle’s point in Λ is that earlier philosophers have gone wrong in looking for the first ἀρχαί as material or formal constituents of things, since we will not reach a numerically single eternal ἀρχή as a shared constituent of the many corruptible things. Aristotle proposes instead to look for a numerically single eternal ἀρχή as a non-constituent moving cause, of the heavens and thus of sublunar things. So here he treats both form and matter as constituents (ἐνυπάρχοντα) and thus as στοιχεῖα, contrasting them with the moving cause, while in Ζ 17 he treats only the matter as a constituent and a στοιχεῖον, and contrasts it with the form. And Simplicius, against Eudemus and Alexander, follows this application of the ἀρχή/στοιχεῖον distinction in Physics I 1: the matter and form are στοιχεῖα, and they do not lead up beyond natural things to the first ἀρχαί of all things, whereas the efficient and final cause are not στοιχεῖα and do lead up, stage by stage, to first ἀρχαί beyond the natural domain.16 On this interpretation, the ἀρχαί discussed in Physics I would all be στοιχεῖα, and Aristotle would go on in subsequent books to discuss ἀρχαί that are not στοιχεῖα. Physics I 1 would not be explicitly
Page 6 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 drawing this distinction, and the end of I 9 (192b2–3) speaks as if we have now discussed all the ἀρχαί, but the opening of Physics I 1, in mentioning both ἀρχαί and στοιχεῖα, would be deliberately allowing the distinction to be drawn should it be needed at some later stage in the argument. And certainly on any interpretation the (p.27) transition to the first unmoved mover as the first ἀρχή, which Aristotle makes in Physics VIII, will depend on recognizing non- constituent ἀρχαί.
Both Aristotle’s narrower account of ἀρχαί in Physics I and his broader account in Physics I–IV are setting themselves up in competition with the accounts περὶ ἀρχῶν of earlier physicists (so first with the division of views on the ἀρχαί, I 2, 184b15–25). These philosophers, like Aristotle, had started by trying to determine about the ἀρχαί before giving their overall account of nature; and Aristotle cites their views in developing his own both in I and in III–IV (and less systematically in II on nature and chance). At the same time, it is not obvious that they mean the same thing by ἀρχή that Aristotle does. Setting aside the question whether they used ἀρχή as a technical term, what Aristotle describes as their ἀρχαί are the things that they posited, at the beginning of their accounts, as existing ‘in the beginning’, before the ordered cosmos came to be out of them. So they are ‘beginnings’ of a cosmogonic narrative. Aristotle gives no such narrative, both because he thinks it would be non-scientific and because he thinks the world is eternal; as I have put it elsewhere, he is ‘denarrativizing’ physics. Still, in the De Caelo and Generation and Corruption and Meteorology and into the biology, he is following roughly the sequence that would have been followed in these narratives, as they would recount the formation of the cosmos, the rotation of the heavenly vortex, the separation of light from heavy bodies, then astronomical and meteorological phenomena and the formation of particular things including plant and animal species within this world-system. But the Physics, unlike these more specialized treatises, does not follow even a quasi-narrative order. Further, the Physics not only denarrativizes, but also decosmologizes. As Simplicius puts it, where Plato and some earlier philosophers ‘raised the questions that are treated here as if they were questions about the cosmos and its parts, and did so in writings on the cosmos ... Aristotle ... teaches, as if there were no cosmos, about natural body itself in its own right’ (In Physica 7,27–34), before going on to consider the cosmos in the De Caelo.
individual comings-to-be.
Despite these differences, Aristotle and earlier physicists share a methodological problem in their accounts of the ἀρχαί: how can we establish these ἀρχαί, if there are no prior ἀρχαί to derive them from? Narrative physicists, when they do
Page 7 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
So Physics I will deal with ἀρχαί of natural things, not in the sense of
 things temporally prior to the cosmos which contains all natural things, but with
 ἀρχαί that are ‘first’ in some more abstract (causal?) sense; and, rather than
 numerically single things presupposed by one great original process of coming-
 to-be, they will be universal types of things presupposed by the many small
    
The Path to the Principles
 not simply lay down their ἀρχαί without argument, argue that the phenomena of the world, under some broad description, require this particular kind of ἀρχαί, or that, if we posited different ἀρχαί, the world would not arise. Thus Lucretius argues that the fact of motion requires the existence of void, the (p.28) fact that things do not irreversibly decay requires incorruptible and therefore indivisible ἀρχαί, and so on; the Timaeus argues that because the world is sensible it must have come-to-be and so must have a maker, that because the world is beautiful its maker must be good and must use an eternal model, and that because earth, water, air, and fire can be transformed into each other they must share a common neutral substratum. So we cannot just immediately ‘determine first concerning the ἀρχαί’, by stipulation or direct observation, and then go on to discuss the things that arise from the ἀρχαί. Rather, as Aristotle says, ‘we must try (πειρατέον) to determine first concerning the ἀρχαί’ and in this trying we must proceed methodically, not immediately leaping to answer the question about the ἀρχαί, but beginning by describing the phenomena and making inferences about what ἀρχαί they require. So there will be two phases of argument: ‘it should not escape us that there is a difference between arguments from the ἀρχαί and arguments to the ἀρχαί. Plato too rightly used to pose this question and to ask whether the path (sc. that we are on at any given moment) is from the ἀρχαί or to the ἀρχαί, as in a race-course from the judges to the goal[- post] or back’ (NE I 4, 1095a30–b1). In Physics I, the argument to Aristotle’s favoured ἀρχαί will start from the fact that things come-to-be, and Aristotle will develop his positive view in discussion with the views of the Presocratics and Plato, not only on what the ἀρχαί are and on how coming-to-be happens, but on how we can use the fact of coming-to-be to make inferences to the ἀρχαί.17
Aristotle starts by saying:
The path goes naturally (πέφυκε ... ἡ ὁδός)18 from the things that are more knowable and clearer to us to the things that are clearer and more knowable by nature: for it is not the same things that are knowable to us and [knowable] without qualification (ἁπλῶς). For this reason we must make progress (προάγειν)19 in this way from the things that are less clear by nature but clearer to us to the things that are clearer and more knowable by nature. At first it is rather confused things that are evident and clear to us,20 but afterwards, [starting] from these, the στοιχεῖα and ἀρχαί become knowable [to us when we] divide these (sc. confused) things.21
(184a16–23)
(p.29) This text sounds very familiar to us, and probably it sounded familiar already to many of its first hearers and readers—it stands in very close relations to things Aristotle says in several other places. These relations include both
Page 8 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
            
The Path to the Principles
 similarities and contrasts: I will try to bring out the main points without too much repetition.
In speaking here of a ‘path’ (ὁδός), which must in context be a path to the ἀρχαί, Aristotle stays close to NE I 4, 1095a30–b1. He also stays close to that passage, and to several others, in distinguishing two senses of ‘knowable’ (γνώριμον). These passages contrast with other passages where Aristotle says, without distinguishing, that in arguing or defining we should start from the more knowable in order to prove or clarify the less knowable, or that the ἀρχαί or στοιχεῖα must be more knowable than what arises from the ἀρχαί or is composed of the στοιχεῖα, since we can know the στοιχεῖα without knowing the composites but cannot know the composites without knowing their στοιχεῖα. Thus he argues in the Protrepticus:
Prior things are always more knowable than posterior things ... And prior things are more causes than posterior things: for when [the former] are removed (ἀναιρούμενα), the things that have their existence (οὐσία) from them are also removed, lengths when numbers [are removed], surfaces when lengths [are removed], when the letters (στοιχεῖα) [are removed] the so-called syllables ...22 So likewise [in the knowledge] about nature: for the knowledge of the causes and στοιχεῖα must be much prior to that of posterior things. For [the latter] are not among the highest things, nor do the first things arise out of them, rather from [the former] and through them the other things manifestly come-to-be and are constituted. For whether fire or air or numbers or some other natures are causes and firsts of the other things, it is impossible to know (γιγνώσκειν) any of the others if we do not know these: for how would someone know (γνωρίζειν) either a phrase (λόγος) if he did not know syllables, or understand these if he did not know (εἰδέναι) any of the στοιχεῖα?
(Part of B33 and all of B35–6, Düring)
Here, for the idea that we cannot know syllables without knowing their στοιχεῖα, Aristotle seems to be following Theaetetus 206a1–b11.23 From the fact that the
(p.30) existence of one knowledge entails the existence of the other knowledge but not vice versa, we infer that the knowledge of the στοιχεῖα or of the prior things is prior to the knowledge of the composites or of the posterior things; and, if the prior things are the cause of knowability to the posterior things, they must be more knowable than the posterior things. But in the Protrepticus Aristotle is trying to convince a potential patron that wisdom or the knowledge of the ἀρχαί is easy, without taking any controversial stand on what the ἀρχαί are. By contrast, in the Physics and other texts, where he is trying to actually acquire (for himself or for his students) a knowledge of the ἀρχαί, he needs more sophisticated methodological reflection. So in Metaphysics Α 2, while he says that ‘the first things and the causes are most knowable, for the other things are
Page 9 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 known on account of these and out of these, not these things through what is subordinate to them’ (982b2–4)—and so far this is very close to Protrepticus B35–6—he now adds that these first things and causes are also ‘most difficult for humans to know’ (982a24), so that what is ‘most knowable’ and what is easiest for us to know come apart.
Thus in NE I 4, after citing from Plato the metaphor of the path from the judges to the goal and back again, he says:
We must begin from what is knowable, and this is [said] in two ways: for some things are knowable to us, and others [knowable] without qualification (ἁπλῶς). So presumably we must begin from what is knowable to us. For this reason, someone who is going to listen in an appropriate way [to lectures] about what is noble and just, and generally about political things, should have been brought up in good habits. For the ἀρχή (i.e. the starting point for us) is the ὅτι, and if this is sufficiently manifest he won’t lack the διότι any further: and this sort of person possesses the ἀρχαί or will grasp them easily enough.
(1095b2–8)
This passage is more methodologically sophisticated than it might at first appear. The talk of the ὅτι and the διότι shows that Aristotle is relying on something like the view developed in Posterior Analytics I 13 and II 1ff., that when we investigate the διότι, why S is P, in the hope of discovering a cause and an argument in proper demonstrative order that S is P, we have to begin from first knowing (or first grasping in some way) the ὅτι, that S is P.24 Aristotle suggests, here in NE I 4 and in Posterior Analytics I 13, that beginning from the ὅτι, which is more knowable to us, we can infer to its cause, which is more knowable in the sense that the cause is the source of scientific knowability to the things which we know scientifically by deducing them from the cause. Being brought up in good habits should give someone at least broadly right beliefs about what things (p.31) are good and noble, without knowing why these things are good or noble, and—in the context in NE I, and the Eudemian parallel —this gives us the starting point we need for reasoning to the good-itself (for humans if not without qualification), which will be most good and will explain the derivative and lesser goodness of the things generally acknowledged to be good.25
Goodness also comes up, in a somewhat surprising way, in the most famous parallel to Physics I 1, 184a16–23, namely Metaphysics Ζ 3, 1029a33–4, b3–12:
It is agreed that some of the sensible things are substances, so we should begin investigating with them. For it is helpful to proceed to what is more knowable. For learning happens in this way for everyone, [going] through the things that are less knowable by nature to the things that are more
Page 10 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 knowable. And this is the task—as in action, [starting] from the things which are good for each person, to make the things that are good without qualification (ὅλως) good for each person, so too from the things that are more knowable to that person, [to make] the things that are knowable by nature knowable to that person. The things that are knowable and first for each person are often scarcely knowable, and have little or nothing of being; but nonetheless from things which are poorly knowable (γνωστά rather than γνώριμα, but the meaning seems to be the same), but knowable to oneself, one must try to know the things that are knowable without qualification (ὅλως γνωστά), passing (μεταβαίνειν), as has been said, through these same things
(sc. the things more knowable to oneself).
Aristotle is here announcing a search for substances beyond the sensible world, which have ‘more being’ than sensible substances: correct method requires that we begin with agreed-on (ὁμολογούμεναι) substances, just as correct method in looking for the highest good requires that we begin with agreed-on goods, and then look for causes of their being or goodness respectively.26 But here he is speaking not of a highest good (human or transcendent) but of ordinary goods such as wealth which are ‘good without qualification (ἁπλῶς)’ (so the parallel NE V 1, 1129b1–6) in that they would benefit a virtuous and healthy human being in normal circumstances, but might be harmful to a particular person at a particular time. It is not right for us to go about amassing as much of these goods as possible simply on the ground that they are ‘good without qualification’, just as it is not right for a sick person to eat without restraint the things that are ‘good without qualification’ and would be good for a healthy person. (p.32) ‘People pray for and pursue these things,27 but they should not: rather, they should pray that the things that are good without qualification should also be good for them, but they should choose the things that are good for them’ (NE V 1, 1129b4–6). What is good for a sick person might be the kind of diet that a sick person would be able to digest, but it might also be, e.g. surgery or cautery, which is not good without qualification and would not be good for a healthy person, but is good for a sick person just because it helps to restore him to health. Likewise, what is good for a not-yet-fully-virtuous person might be simply the things he can enjoy without damage to his virtue, but perhaps also things that can help move him towards virtue, so that what is good without qualification will become good for him too.
To draw the cognitive analogy that Aristotle intends in Metaphysics Ζ 3: when he says that ‘the things that are knowable and first for each person are often scarcely knowable, and have little or nothing of being’, the implication is that we are initially in a disordered cognitive condition, like the initially disordered medical or moral condition in the comparison cases. We would likely harm ourselves, and in any case get no benefit, if we immediately tried to know what
Page 11 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 is most knowable by nature, as if the sick person tried to eat the healthy person’s diet. We must, instead, gradually strengthen our cognitive condition until the things that are more knowable by nature become knowable to us, like the people of Republic VII 516a–b who must gradually strengthen their sight until they can look at the sun. Studying some of the things that are knowable to us is supposed to help us in this, perhaps by instilling intellectual discipline (patience in following out long chains of reasoning without reliance on imagination or fear of contradicting common opinions), but mainly by allowing us to infer from these things to their less immediately accessible causes. Aristotle makes a similar point in Topics VI 4 in the context of definition: in definition, as in demonstration, we must start from what is prior and more knowable (141a26–30), but sometimes we must start not from what is more knowable without qualification but from what is more knowable to us. Thus when we define a point as the limit of a line, a line as the limit of a plane, and the plane as the limit of a solid, we are defining the prior through the posterior by nature, and we do so because the solid is more manifest to sensation (141b3– 22); ‘and perhaps (ἴσως) too what is knowable without qualification is not what is knowable to everyone, but what is knowable to those whose thought is well disposed, just as what is healthy without qualification is what is healthy to those whose body is well disposed’ (p.33) (142a9–11). What marks our cognitive condition as disordered is the fact that the things most knowable to us ‘have little or nothing of being’ (Metaphysics Ζ 3, 1029b9–10), or that ‘as bats’ eyes are to the light of day, so is our souls’ νοῦς to the things that are by nature most manifest of all’ (Metaphysics α 1, 993b9–11, clearly drawing on the Republic’s Sun simile). Or, if talk of degrees of reality and luminosity seems unhelpful, we can say instead that we are compelled to start by inferring from effects to causes, rather than in the scientific order from causes to effects. Coming to have scientific knowledge in some domain is not simply acquiring new truths or new causal explanations, but reordering what we learn through what, bringing our cognitive order into alignment with the order in reality, so that we will know effects through knowing their causes, which are also the causes of their scientific knowability.28
Aristotle is in one way or another describing such a process of reordering our cognitions and reaching a healthy cognitive condition when he says, in Physics I 1, that we come to scientific understanding by γνωρίζειν the ἀρχαί or causes or στοιχεῖα, which are γνώριμα by nature but not to us, and when he says, not here but in the parallel passages, that these things will become γνώριμα to us as well. However, there is an issue about how γνωρίζειν and being γνώριμον are related. I translated γνωρίζειν above as ‘recognize’. Perhaps this is the basic notion, and γνώριμον is defined in terms of γνωρίζειν: for X to be γνώριμον to person S is for S to be able to γνωρίζειν X, or to be able to do so well or easily, and so, when we become (better) able to recognize the ἀρχαί, they become (more) γνώριμα to us. But it is also possible, as David Sedley suggested at the Symposium, that
Page 12 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 γνωρίζειν is defined in terms of γνώριμον: for S to γνωρίζειν X is for S to make X γνώριμον for S.29 If so, when Aristotle says that we come to scientific
cognitions. ‘Familiar’ cannot ultimately be the translation (p.34) of γνώριμον (what could it mean to say that something is familiar ἁπλῶς rather than to some person?) so for something to be γνώριμον would still be for it to be knowable or recognizable, but that knowing or recognizing would be called not γνωρίζειν but γιγνώσκειν, and γνωρίζειν would be a derivative term, ‘making something γιγνωσκ-able’. But Physics I gives us no more evidence, and I have not been persuaded that this distinction between γιγνώσκειν and γνωρίζειν will work consistently in Aristotle.30
The real trouble, however, emerges when we juxtapose Physics I 1 with the other parallels, and especially Posterior Analytics I 2. Aristotle starts there from a characterization of scientific knowing (ἐπίστασθαι) as knowing a thing through its causes, as in Physics I 1, 184a10–14, and then infers a characterization of when a deduction is scientific or demonstrative: to be a demonstration, a deduction must be ‘from things that are true and primary and immediate [or unmiddled] and more knowable (γνωριμώτερα) and prior and causes of the conclusion’ (Post. An. I 2, 71b21–2). He now glosses ‘more knowable and prior and causes of the conclusion’:
They must be causes and more knowable and prior: causes, because we know [a thing] scientifically whenever we know its cause (τότε ἐπιστάμεθα ὅταν τὴν αίτίαν εἰδῶμεν, cp. Physics I 1, 184a12–14 τότε γὰρ οἰόμεθα γιγνώσκειν ἕκαστον, ὅταν τὰ αἴτια γνωρίσωμεν τὰ πρῶτα καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς τὰς πρώτας καὶ μέχρι τῶν στοιχείων); and prior, if they are indeed causes; and known before, not only in the sense of acquaintance (ξυνιέναι, sc. with each of the terms) but also through knowing (εἰδέναι) that they are [the case]. But ‘prior’ and ‘more knowable’ are [said] in two ways: for ‘prior by nature’ and ‘prior for us’ are not the same, nor ‘more knowable’ and ‘more knowable to us’. I call prior and more knowable to us the things that are closer to sensation, prior and more knowable without qualification the things that are more remote [from sensation]. The things that are most universal are most remote, the particulars closest; and these are opposite to each other.
(71b29–72a5)
This is very close to Physics I 1, except that Posterior Analytics I 2 says that the more universal things are more knowable by nature and less knowable to us, whereas Physics I 1 says that the more universal things are more knowable to us and less knowable by nature. And Metaphysics Α 2, which has many echoes with
Page 13 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
 understanding by γνωρίζειν the ἀρχαί, he would mean not that we master a
 science through recognizing the ἀρχαί, but through making them familiar to
 ourselves, and more familiar than their effects, i.e. through reordering our
    
The Path to the Principles
 Posterior Analytics I 2, seems to side with the Posterior Analytics against the Physics here: the Metaphysics chapter says that the desirable characteristic of ‘knowing (ἐπίστασθαι) all things’ will belong ‘to the person who most of all has universal (p.35) knowledge (ἐπιστήμη) ... for this person knows, in a way, all the subject things (i.e. if we know that every B is A, we will, in a way, know of each of the B things that it is A); but the things that are most universal will also be just about (σχεδόν) the most difficult for human beings to know, for they are the most remote from the senses’ (982a21–5). Metaphysics Α 2 also connects universal knowledge with knowledge of causes, and the most universal knowledge with knowledge of the first causes, presumably on the ground that the highest causes are causes of the most things, so that in knowing them we will know the most universal effects.31 Physics I 1, however, says that in looking for the ἀρχαί and causes and στοιχεῖα we start from the universals which are more knowable to us and proceed to the particulars which are more knowable by nature. This is the notorious problem of Physics I 1, to which I will turn, with the remaining section of the chapter (184a23–b14), after a brief comment on the last sentence of the section already quoted (184a16–23).32
To repeat that last sentence: ‘at first it is rather confused things which are evident and clear to us, but afterwards, starting from these, the στοιχεῖα and ἀρχαί become knowable [to us when we] divide these (sc. confused)
things’ (184a21–3). Up to a point, this is what we would expect Aristotle to say. Initially (p.36) it is not the ἀρχαί which are clear to us, but other things, which are not clear by nature; starting by examining these things, we get clearer about the ἀρχαί. What may be more surprising about this sentence is the suggestion that we get clearer about the ἀρχαί by dividing the initially given things (rather than, say, by inferring from these things to their causes). And this is connected with another peculiarity, Aristotle’s referring to the initially given things as ‘confused’ (συγκεχυμένα). This does not seem to be simply a synonym for ‘unclear’ (ἀσαφῆ). Rather, things are confused if they are unclear because they are mixed with each other; and, if this is the source of the difficulty, we will get clearer about them if we separate or divide them from each other. Things might be mixed with each other in a straightforwardly bodily way, like the ingredients of Anaxagoras’ primordial mixture, where ‘all things being together, none of them was evident, on account of their smallness: for everything contained both air and aether, both infinite’ (B1). But Plato also says in Republic VII that sensation initially perceives contrary attributes mixed together in the same thing, and calls on reason to distinguish them: ‘sight too sees the large and the small, not separated but as something confused (οὐ κεχωρισμένον ἀλλὰ συγκεχυμένον τι) ... In order to get clear about this (διὰ τὴν τούτου σαφήνειαν), thought (νόησις) was compelled to see large and small not confused (συγκεχυμένα) but delimited from each other (διωρισμένα), contrariwise to sight’ (524c3–8). Without agreeing with either Anaxagoras or Plato about what the ἀρχαί are, or about how they are related to the things given to sensation,
Page 14 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
                     
The Path to the Principles
 Aristotle has a general methodological agreement with them. He also agrees with them, more specifically, that the fact that sensible things come to be is a sign that allows us to recognize the compresence of contraries in them (although for Aristotle the compresence is just something’s being F actually and not-F potentially), and thus allows us to infer that sensible things are not themselves primitives but arise from ἀρχαί, and allows us to say something about what these ἀρχαί are like.
The Anaxagorean and Platonic model of things initially given to us mixed together, and needing to be separated, also helps to explain why Aristotle speaks here not just of ἀρχαί but of στοιχεῖα and ἀρχαί: as we have seen, a στοιχεῖον is an ἀρχή thought of as a constituent in a thing alongside other στοιχεῖα, and we recognize the στοιχεῖα by dividing the syllable into them.33 Aristotle presumably does not mean that the ἀρχαί must be found as ingredients of the initially given things, but he takes such cases as models for how we go about searching for the ἀρχαί. Something else that we can take from Plato and Anaxagoras: we do not just start with a confused cognition of the mixture and come to a clear cognition of its elements. Rather, we also start with a confused cognition of the elements themselves (so, in Republic VII, of large and small and similar pairs of (p.37) contraries), as they are given to us in the mixture (and are initially less knowable to us than the mixture), and come to a clearer cognition of these same elements. Inspired by this model—or so I will try to suggest in the next section—Aristotle wants to show in Physics I how we can gradually come to a clearer knowledge of the ἀρχαί of natural things.
Aristotle says:
For this reason, we must proceed from universals (ἐκ τῶν καθόλου) to particulars (ἐπὶ τὰ καθ’ ἕκαστα):34 for the whole is more knowable to sensation, and the universal is a kind of whole (ὅλον τι), for the universal encompasses (περιλαμβάνει) many things as parts. And the same thing, in a way, also happens with names (or nouns, ὀνόματα) in relation towards their definition (λόγος): for [a name] like ‘circle’ signifies something as a whole and indeterminately (ὅλον τι καὶ ἀδιορίστως σημαίνει; or, reading ὅλον τι καὶ ἀδιόριστον σημαίνει, ‘signifies something whole and indeterminate’), whereas its definition (ὁρισμός) divides into particulars. And little children at first call (προσαγορεύει; in some manuscripts ὑπολαμβάνει, so ‘think’ rather than ‘call’) all men fathers and all women mothers, and afterwards they distinguish (διορίζει) each of these (viz. men from fathers and women from mothers).35
(184a23–b14)
(p.38) This passage picks up on the sentence we have just discussed, where the things initially given to us are wholes and must be divided for us to
Page 15 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 understand clearly the things we are most interested in understanding, the ἀρχαί and στοιχεῖα of the initially given things. He did not mean ‘dividing’ (or the wholes which must be given for us to divide) literally, or at any rate he did not mean wholes and dividing in the most straightforward sense. But, as he now clarifies, we must start from universals, and the universal is a kind of whole. That the universal is a kind of whole emerges also from the Metaphysics Δ chapter on wholes, Δ 26. There the sense of ‘whole’ as ‘what encompasses (περιέχει) the things encompassed in such a way that they are one’ applies in one way to wholes that encompass things ‘in such a way that the one is [composed] out of them’ (the more usual sense of ‘whole’), but also in another way to wholes that encompass things ‘in such a way that each of them is one thing’, i.e. so that some one thing is predicated of all of them (1023b27–9). For, as Aristotle explains, ‘the universal, and what is said universally (ὅλως) as being some whole (ὅλον τι ὄν), is universal as encompassing many things through being predicated of each, and all of them are one in the sense that each of them [is that one thing], e.g. human and horse and god [are some one thing] because they are all animals’ (1023b29–32). And if the universal is a kind of whole, it is reasonable to speak of dividing it.
The case of people proceeding from the name to the definition of ‘circle’, and the case of the babies learning to distinguish their parents from the rest of adult humanity and restrain their enthusiasm in saying ‘mama!’ and ‘papa!’, are meant to be analogies from ordinary experience for what we (adults who know the definition of ‘circle’ as well as we know our parents) must do in searching for the ἀρχαί, or in searching for a clearer knowledge of the ἀρχαί than we have to begin with. It is striking how often Aristotle uses forms of διορίζω or ὁρίζω, three times in this passage. We start by perceiving something analogous to a whole or a syllable ἀδιορίστως, without articulations, and then come to a clearer knowledge by doing something analogous to discerning the individual letters or phonemes within the syllable, as we learn what the first syllable of the (p.39) spoken name ‘Theaetetus’ is by breaking it down into the phonemes θ and ε (so that we can spell the syllable by writing each of these down separately), distinguishing θ from τ and so on. The ὁρισμός of ‘circle’ is thought of as adding this kind of articulation to our originally imprecise cognition of a circle, whether the ὁρισμός is a genus–species definition spelling the species-form out into its genera and differentiae, or whether it spells out the circle into parts in a more straightforward sense, the circumference and the centre and perhaps the radii, as in Euclid’s definition of a circle as ‘a plane figure surrounded by a single [curved] line, to which all the straight lines falling from a single point inside the figure are equal to each other’ (I def. 15).36 (Without intending to build anything on it, I note that Aristotle is to all appearances taking the example of circle from Plato, Seventh Letter 342–3, where we are seeking ‘what is knowable (γνωστόν) and truly being’, for which Plato’s example is circle. There we start from the name (ὄνομα) and proceed to the λόγος—Plato gives it as ‘what has an equal
Page 16 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 distance from the extremes to the middle in every direction’—and also consider the ‘image’, a concrete more or less circular object drawn in the sand or produced on a lathe. All these things are ἀσαφῆ and unstable—including the λόγος, because it is made out of nouns and verbs (or predicates, ῥήματα)—and so they impel us towards something further which will be knowable in the strongest sense.) When the child διορίζει, it is extensionally distinguishing its mother from other women whom it had incautiously addressed as ‘mama!’; perhaps it is also distinguishing ‘mama’ from ‘woman’, or distinguishing, within the intension of ‘mama’, between the generic constituents ‘human, adult, female’ and the further differentiae of its mother.
Serious issues remain about what methodological lesson Aristotle is trying to support by speaking about wholes and parts, universals and particulars, names and definitions, and the example of the children. One fairly basic divergence is between two possible readings of the passage, which for lack of better terms I’ll call Reading A and Reading B. According to Reading A, all of Aristotle’s expressions and analogies are trying to get at the same thing, namely: we start with a crude cognition of things which are causally derived from some ἀρχαί, and which we cannot know scientifically until we come to a cognition of those ἀρχαί. These initially given things can be described at least metaphorically as if they were wholes and the ἀρχαί were their constituent στοιχεῖα; and what we do in coming to a cognition of the ἀρχαί can be described at least metaphorically as an articulation or demarcation, a διαιρεῖν or διορίζειν, of these constituents from each other within the whole. According to Reading B, by contrast, we do not simply start from a crude cognition of things which are derived from ἀρχαί.
(p.40) Rather, we start from a cognitive state in which things that are derived from ἀρχαί are more knowable to us than their ἀρχαί, but we start not simply from a cognition of the derived things, but also from an obscure cognition of the ἀρχαί themselves. (So where Reading A takes ἐκ τούτων at 184a22–3—‘[starting] from these (ἐκ τούτων), the στοιχεῖα and ἀρχαί become knowable’—to mean ‘from the confused things’, Reading B takes it to mean ‘from the confused things’ being better known to us’, ‘from our being in a cognitive condition where the confused things are better known to us’.) As we have seen, our passage speaks repeatedly of [δι]ορίζειν, where we start by perceiving something ἀδιορίστως and then come to a clearer knowledge. But already in the first sentence of the chapter Aristotle had said that we must first try to διορίσασθαι τὰ περὶ τὰς ἀρχάς (184a15–16), and this seems to imply that the ἀρχαί themselves, not just the things which arise from them, are given indeterminately and must be further determined. Because the derived things can be described at least metaphorically as if they were wholes composed of the ἀρχαί, the ἀρχαί can be described at least metaphorically as being present within the derived things, and thus as being cognized obscurely and collectively when we cognize the whole of which they are parts. When we initially know the ἀρχαί, we know them only under some vague and thus universal description—we might, for
Page 17 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 instance, start by knowing them only under the description ἀρχαί, or ἀρχαί of natural things—and we gradually come to know them under more precise descriptions, and these more precise descriptions will apply only to them, rather than applying universally both to them and to other things. Or we might come to know some one ἀρχή under a more precise description which will apply only to that ἀρχή rather than applying universally to all the ἀρχαί, and this might be described as articulating or demarcating the ἀρχαί from each other.
While I prefer Reading B, both readings have to face some difficulties. The main difficulty with Reading A is that while it can more or less explain why Aristotle would describe the things initially given as wholes, it seems unable to explain why he would describe them as universals. And the description of the things initially given as universals does not seem to be just one more metaphorical description (or description applying literally to some cases and metaphorically extended to others), like describing these things as wholes or comparing them to names (or comparing our initial cognition of things to knowing them merely by name). Rather, Aristotle’s talk about wholes seems to be building up to a point about universals, and it is a major drawback of any interpretation of the chapter if it cannot explain this. Aristotle says at 184a23–6, ‘For this reason (διὸ), we must proceed from universals to particulars: for the whole is more knowable to sensation, and the universal is a kind of whole, for the universal encompasses many things as parts’. The διὸ points back to the previous sentence, 184a21–3, where wholes (or ‘confused things’) are initially (p.41) better known to us, and we make progress by dividing them into their στοιχεῖα. ‘For the whole is more knowable to sensation’ picks up this premise, and ‘the universal is a kind of whole’ adds a new premise, which Aristotle combines to yield the new conclusion ‘we must proceed from universals to particulars’. ‘For the whole is more knowable to sensation’ recapitulates the argument of 184a21–3 that confused things are more knowable to us in our initial condition (‘more knowable to sensation’ need not mean that in all cases we have sense-perception of the whole, but that it is more knowable to us than other things while we are in the condition in which sense-perception is our standard of clear knowledge), but this is part of a chain of arguments whose conclusion is that we must proceed from universals to particulars.37 (Or, more cautiously, that universals are one kind of whole, and so are among the things from which we must proceed.) Aristotle could very easily have given us an argument that we must proceed from wholes to parts, and stopped there. Instead he embeds this in an argument that we must proceed from universals to particulars. Notoriously there is at least apparent conflict between what Aristotle says here about the order of proceeding and what he says in Posterior Analytics I 2. If ‘universals’ here were just an alternative way of saying ‘wholes’, then why bother, why not just stop with the argument about wholes? Reading A, it seems to me, will have great difficulty in explaining this. Reading B, by contrast, can say that in coming to know the ἀρχαί we will proceed from universals, that is, from knowledge of the
Page 18 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 ἀρχαί under vague and universal descriptions, to knowledge of the ἀρχαί under more precise descriptions, which apply only to the ἀρχαί and not to other things, or which apply only to one ἀρχή and not to others. Here the analogy with other kinds of wholes may be helpful. We can start with a general apprehension of a wagon, which is a whole encompassing things ‘in such a way that the one is [composed] out of them’ (Metaphysics Δ 26, 1023b28–9), and then distinguish its hundred constituents from each other and from the whole; or we can start with a general apprehension of animal, or with a vague apprehension of elephant as an animal, where animal is a whole encompassing things ‘in such a way that each of them is [some] one thing [namely animal]’ (1023b28), and then distinguish elephants from other animals until we reach a more precise description applying only to elephants. But, although there is an analogy with other kinds of wholes, Aristotle is using it here to draw a conclusion specifically about universal wholes.
(p.42) Alexander endorses or at least entertains Reading B, saying that ‘it is possible that by universals here he also means the axioms’ such as ‘that the ἀρχή must be either one or more [than one]’, itself derived from the principle of excluded middle, and then ‘that the ἀρχαί are several, and neither one nor infinitely many, then that there must be both a contrariety in them and something that underlies the contrariety’, all of which Aristotle deduces before he says what the ἀρχαί themselves are (all quotes from Simplicius In Physica 19,21–33). Thomas also endorses Reading B when he says that Aristotle in this chapter shows the order in which we must proceed in physics, and proves two things, namely ‘that we must begin from a study of the principles’ and ‘that among the principles we should begin from more universal principles’ (or, presumably, from principles under more universal descriptions). By contrast, Simplicius and Averroes endorse Reading A, and Simplicius raises a difficulty against Reading B: Simplicius asks, if Alexander were right, ‘how will this procedure send us up from composites to the ἀρχαί’, and complains that the universals Alexander is talking about are ‘observations about the ἀρχαί’ rather than ‘composed of the ἀρχαί of natural things’ (Simplicius 19,28–9 and 19,33– 20,2).38 One reply, on behalf of Reading B, might be that these universals are composed of the ἀρχαί in the broad sense that they are universally predicated of the ἀρχαί and, as Aristotle says here, the universal is ὅλον τι. Another reply might be that, when we know composites confusedly, we also know their ἀρχαί confusedly, and that we must proceed both from composites to ἀρχαί and from ἀρχαί known confusedly to ἀρχαί known distinctly. But, admittedly, Aristotle does not always make clear when he is talking about universals and when about other kinds of wholes, or when he is talking about knowing composites (or other derivative things) confusedly and when he is talking about knowing the ἀρχαί themselves confusedly.39
A further difficulty for Reading A would be in connecting what Aristotle says here about method with what he actually goes on to do in Physics I 2–9. From Reading A, we would expect that Aristotle would be interested in resolving (p.
Page 19 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 43) wholes given in sense-experience into their constituents, and it is true in a broad sense that Physics I 2–9 does this. But we would not expect that Aristotle would start, immediately after our passage, with the a priori universal ‘the ἀρχή must be either one or more than one’ (I 2, 184b15), would spend several chapters discussing and criticizing the views of earlier philosophers on the ἀρχαί of all things, and would then discuss the contrariety and the number of these ἀρχαί, all in a generally ‘top-down’ rather than ‘bottom-up’ way, before giving his own analysis of coming-to-be in I 7. And we might have expected that, when he does start resolving wholes given in sense-experience into their constituents, he would begin from some richer empirical description, beyond the bare fact that natural things come-to-be (and that, say, humans come-to-be musical). As far as I can see, on Reading A, Physics I 1 will be a general description of the procedure of research in natural science, or of that phase of research in which we proceed from posterior things to their ἀρχαί, but it will not describe what Aristotle actually does in investigating the ἀρχαί in I 2–9. I 1 would have the look of a free-floating προοίμιον ready to be tacked on to any scientific work. (Perhaps a defender of Reading A should reply that Physics I 1 is not supposed to describe Physics I 2–9: rather, both I 1 and I 2–9 are supposed to describe the method of natural science, I 1 in a shorter and more general way, I 2–9 focusing on the explanation of coming-to-be, and conceptually clarifying the kinds of ἀρχαί that any explanation of coming-to-be will use. But is I 2–9 really about method?)
For Reading B, by contrast, it is entirely natural that Aristotle should begin with some extremely general descriptions of the ἀρχαί—they are either one or many; they are not one and unchanging; they are not one at all; but they are also not very many; they are or include contraries—and then proceed to give a more precise listing of how many and what the ἀρχαί are, and to distinguish matter from privation against those (especially Plato) who have confused them. The point is not that Aristotle, abandoning the method of beginning empirically, with what is most knowable to sensation, is instead seeking the ἀρχαί through dialectic, beginning with universal truths or endoxic plausible-truths, such as might be reflected in earlier philosophers’ opinions about the ἀρχαί as well as in ordinary idioms for talking about coming-to-be. On the contrary, Aristotle is adhering to the method of beginning with the things that are most knowable to sensation, or rather most knowable to us while sense-perception is our standard of clear knowledge. But these will be unarticulated general observations, such as that things come-to-be out of their contraries (and therefore that the ἀρχαί are contraries), which are in need of dialectical scrutiny and articulation before they can pass as scientific first principles.
In favour of Reading B, and of an interpretation of ‘universal’ as meaning ‘universal’ and not just ‘whole’ or ‘sensible composite’, Aristotle later explicitly
(p.44) picks up on the idea that we should proceed from universals to particulars, and that this is a process that is happening within the argument of
Page 20 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 the Physics. Physics I 7 starts by saying that we should first speak ‘about all coming-to-be: for it is according to nature after first speaking of what is common (τὰ κοινά) to then consider what is proper to each thing (τὰ περὶ ἕκαστον ἴδια θεωρεῖν)’ (189b30–2). Physics III 1 says that, having undertaken to speak about nature (which is an ἀρχή of motion), we should now investigate what motion is, and also continuity, infinity, place, void, and time, because these are (or have a prima facie claim to be) necessary conditions of motion; and Aristotle adds that there is also another reason for investigating these things first, namely ‘because they are common to all things and universal ... for the consideration of particulars (ἡ περὶ τῶν ἰδίων θεωρία) is posterior to the [consideration] of common things’ (200b21–5). And this seems to fit at least roughly the way that Aristotle actually proceeds in the physical treatises, with the Physics discussing things common to all natural beings, the De Caelo specializing to the simple bodies and the local motions natural to each of them, the On Generation and Corruption specializing to general and corruptible (thus sublunar) bodies and their generation (especially the inexhaustibility of their generation), and the De Anima and biological works specializing to living things and their souls and their characteristic actions and passions. (We might compare the argument in Parts of Animals I 1 that we should first explain attributes common to an entire genus before descending to explain attributes proper to each of its species, so that we will not have to repeat the same explanation many times over: e.g. we will explain breathing in all blooded land animals, rather than explaining it once for dogs, once for horses, and once for elephants. Thomas in the proemium to his Physics commentary apparently links the sequence of the physical treatises, the thesis of Physics I 1 that we should proceed from universals to particulars, and the argument from Parts of Animals I 1.) And this passage from more universal to more particular subject-genera (e.g. from all natural beings to corruptible ones) or from attributes that apply more universally to attributes that apply only to particular genera, also in at least some cases involves a passage from more universal ἀρχαί to more particular ἀρχαί, or from ἀρχαί under more universal descriptions to ἀρχαί under more particular descriptions. (As we will see, the formulation requires some care.) Thus in Physics I we talk about matter in general, but in On Generation and Corruption, in investigating the material ἀρχή of generation and especially of the inexhaustibility of generation, we reach the matter which is common to earth, water, air, and fire, and thus ultimately to all generable and corruptible things, but not common to them and the heavenly bodies. Likewise, in Physics I we talk about form in general, but in the De Anima we talk specifically about the soul, which is the formal (and efficient and final) ἀρχή of living things. Also, as we have seen, when Physics III–IV investigate motion, infinity, place, void, and time, (p.45) the thought is not simply that these are attributes common to all natural things, but that they are, or have some claim to be, ἀρχαί in common of all natural things, existing prior to each particular natural thing.
Page 21 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
                    
The Path to the Principles
 So, at a first formulation, we can say that Physics I–IV, or I–VIII, discuss
 attributes common to all natural things, and the common ἀρχαί of all natural
 things as causes of those universal attributes, while subsequent physical
 treatises discuss attributes proper to some subclass of natural things, and more
 particular ἀρχαί as causes of those attributes. This formulation will need revising on several grounds. First, even within Physics I–IV there is a movement from more universal to more particular attributes and ἀρχαί. It is a striking oddity of Physics I that while its first sentence presupposes that we are pursuing a science of nature, and says that we should look for ἀρχαί of natural things, the concept of nature virtually drops out of the argument for the rest of the book. Aristotle does use the word φύσις, in marking out the domain of study and past thinkers who have studied it, in speaking of things that are ‘more knowable by nature’, and in redundant uses (‘the nature of X’ periphrastic for ‘X’, ‘some nature’ for ‘something’),
(The ἀρχαί of natural things will be ἀρχαί of all changeable things, because all non-natural changeable things are
posterior to natural things, but knowing them as ἀρχαί of changeable things is not the same as knowing them as ἀρχαί of natural things, and forms of artefacts will be included in the broader dragnet of book I but excluded from the narrower investigation of the ἀρχαί of natural things in book II.) So there is narrowing already from book I to book II, and Aristotle has not really delivered on the promise of an investigation of the ἀρχαί of natural things until book II. Physics I is complete and self-contained in that it gives as much of an account of the στοιχεῖα or constituent ἀρχαί of natural or changeable things as can be given without an account of what distinguishes natural things from other changeable things—that is, without an account of the ἀρχὴ κινήσεως. But because it clearly announces an investigation of the ἀρχαί of natural things, which cannot be completed without this investigation of nature, book I could never have been intended to exist on its own without book II.40
(p.46) As we have seen, I 7, taking up I 1’s talk of proceeding from universals to particulars, says that we should speak first about what is common to all coming-to-be. What are the advantages of proceeding in this way? I would suggest the following: Aristotle frames his general account of coming-to-be as a response to an aporia against the possibility of any coming-to-be. But the aporia is much more acute against substantial coming-to-be, and most of the philosophers who rejected substantial change thought that apparent substantial changes were real qualitative changes or real combination and segregation (thus a local motion of the parts). None of these philosophers would have felt
Page 22 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
 but the only premise he uses about nature is that ‘some or all
 natural things are in motion’ (I 2, 185a13), and thus that they come-to-be, or at
 least come-to-be something. Aristotle argues to the ἀρχαί from the fact of
 change, so they will be ἀρχαί of changeable things, but there is nothing here to
 distinguish natural from artificial things; it is only once he defines natural things
 in II 1 that he can recognize his ἀρχαί specifically as ἀρχαί of natural things, e.g.
 as the nature-as-form of natural things.
             
The Path to the Principles
 surprised or enlightened to learn that a thing-which-is-F can come-to-be when a
 persisting thing (or several persisting things) which had previously been not-F
 becomes (or become) F—hot air comes-to-be when air becomes hot, or a word
 comes-to-be when its letters become arranged in a certain way—although they
 might not have thought of putting the point in such abstract and general terms.
 But they would say that this does not help on the possibility of substantial
 coming-to-be, of γένεσις ἁπλῶς, since when S comes-to-be F the underlying
 thing is already there, and does not come-to-be but merely acquires a new
 attribute: γένεσις ἁπλῶς, they think, would have to be γένεσις ἐκ μὴ ὄντος, and
 this, they think, is impossible. Aristotle thinks that, once we have formulated the explanation of the possibility of coming-to-be in general terms, we can then specialize to the case of substantial coming-to-be. In substantial coming-to-be, as in other coming-to-be, there is a persisting subject, but this subject is not τόδε τι, and we should not be overly hasty in infering from the familiar cases of accidental change that this thing, τόδε, is always what persists through the change and never the result of the change.41 The analogy with the familiar cases is supposed to lead us to recognize that, as in accidental change, so too in substantial change, there is something that preexists and persists through the change. But in accidental change the persisting thing is the οὐσία which ‘this’ refers to when we point to the result of the change, while in substantial change ‘this’ refers to the new thing that has come-to-be: and so what persists is not a τόδε, not what the thing that has come-to-be is.42
(p.47) As Aristotle puts it in I 7, ‘The underlying nature (i.e. the underlying whatever-it-may-be) is knowable by analogy: for as bronze is to a statue or wood to a bed, or as the material (ὕλη)43 and formless, before taking on the form, is to any of the other things that possess a form, so it (sc. what underlies and persists through substantial change) is to οὐσία and τόδε τι and being’ (191a7–12). And that sounds like as definitive a statement as we could hope for.44 But a few lines later, after summarizing the results of I 5–7, Aristotle adds, ‘but whether the form or the ὑποκείμενον is οὐσία is not yet clear, but it is clear that the ἀρχαί are three and how they are three, and what is their manner (i.e. how they are causes of the things that come-to-be)’ (191a19–21). So Aristotle is deferring the issue, and with it the possibility of substantial coming-to-be. The ‘not yet’ clearly refers ahead to Physics II 1, where Aristotle argues that ‘the φύσις and οὐσία of the things that are by nature’ (193a9–10) is not (or not primarily) their matter but their form, which determines what a thing’s motion is naturally directed towards: so that if (say) water is heated until it becomes air and thus acquires a new natural disposition towards upward motion, it has undergone a genuine substantial change. And the reason that in I 7 Aristotle defers the question whether the form or the ὑποκείμενον is οὐσία is that the answer is different in the case of artefacts (Antiphon is perfectly correct that the artisan has not added any new οὐσία to the bed) and in the case of natural things. And so Aristotle cannot answer the question until II 1, when he defines natural things and
Page 23 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
             
The Path to the Principles
 distinguishes them from artefacts, and so can make an argument about what their φύσις and οὐσία is.
ἀρχαί of natural things, and thus of substantial coming-to-be. We might also say with Alexander that Physics I itself proceeds from the more universal to the more particular, since Aristotle ‘will show first that the ἀρχαί are several, and neither one nor infinitely many, then that there must be both a contrariety in them and something that underlies the contrariety. Then, making a transition from these [assertions], which are common, he will show what they (the ἀρχαί) are: for the person who knows these [more universal assertions] does not yet know (p.48) what the ἀρχαί are’ (Alexander quoted by Simplicius 19,21–5). In narrowing down to what the ἀρχαί are, Aristotle starts with the most general question from the diairetic doxographical tradition, how many are the ἀρχαί (whether one or many, if many whether finitely or infinitely many, if finitely many how many exactly).45 Indeed, he starts from the even more general question whether there are ἀρχαί, since he argues that if there were a single unchanging being there would be not one but zero ἀρχαί, since there would be nothing for it to be an ἀρχή of (185a3–5). In asking whether there are ἀρχαί and how many and what they are, Aristotle is broadly following the method of Posterior Analytics II, asking first εἰ ἔστι and then τί ἐστι. But we cannot proceed with the ἀρχαί as with an eclipse, first asking whether it is and then discovering what it is by investigating the causes of its existence, since the ἀρχαί have no further causes. Instead, by asking whether coming-to-be is and then what are the causes of its existence, we bring to light not only what coming-to-be is but also what its ἀρχαί are.46 We can pursue these questions by investigating the aporiai against coming-to-be and seeing what kinds of ἀρχαί are involved in solving them, starting with the solutions given explicitly or implicitly in earlier philosophers’ accounts of coming-to-be. This investigation will lead to the results, as Alexander says, ‘that there must be both a contrariety in them and something that underlies the contrariety’. This is already more particular than saying that the ἀρχαί are more than one (or that they are just a few). And when Aristotle then distinguishes the material ἀρχή from the privation, and says that the matter as such is not contrary to form, he is further ‘particularizing’ as Physics I 1 recommends, (p.49) distinguishing two things that were previously confused. (‘Previously confused’ not just in the sense that we had confused them until we draw the relevant distinctions in the course of the argument, but also in the sense that Plato had confused them, when he separates the material ἀρχή from all participation in the form and assumes that the resulting privative attributes are essential to the material ἀρχή.)47
But there is an important sense in which Physics I never says what the ἀρχαί are. To say that an ἀρχή is matter or form is not to say what thing this ἀρχή is, or even what kind of thing it is, but only to say what kind of cause it is, thus what
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
So: the Physics I account of the ἀρχαί is ‘universal’ or ‘general’ in that it
  describes the ἀρχαί of coming-to-be in general, before Physics II narrows to
                  Page 24 of 37

The Path to the Principles
 relation it has to its effect. This is what Aristotle means in Metaphysics Λ 4–5 by saying that the matter and form of things in different genera are not numerically the same thing, or even the same in kind, but only the same by analogy (Λ 5, 1071a24–34, Λ 4, 1070a31–3). (Most obviously, things in different categories have no shared matter or form; but even within the category of substance, there is no common matter of sublunar and celestial things, Λ 2, 1069b24–6. And even within a single species the matters, forms, and movers of different individuals are numerically different, ‘for the individual is the ἀρχή of the individuals: for human is (the ἀρχή) of human universally, but there is no [universal human who is the ἀρχή of humans universally], but rather Peleus of Achilles and your father of you’, Λ 5, 1071a20–2.)48 So it would be more accurate to say, not that Physics I discusses universal ἀρχαί, matter and form and privation, but that it discusses ἀρχαί under universal descriptions.
This is an important difference between Aristotle and his Platonist rivals. In Physics I 5 Aristotle says that his predecessors, constrained by the truth itself, have all posited pairs of contrary στοιχεῖα:
But they differ from each other in that some of them take (i.e. assume or posit as ἀρχαί) prior things and others posterior things, and some of them [take] things that are more knowable by λόγος and others things that are more knowable by sensation (for some posit hot and cold, others moist and dry, others odd and even or strife and love as causes of coming-to-be, and these differ from each other in the aforesaid manner). So in one way they are saying the same things, in another way they are saying different (p. 50) things—different just as most people think, but the same by analogy ... So in this way they speak both alike and differently, and better and worse, some [positing] things that are more knowable by λόγος, as we have said before, and others things that are more knowable by sensation (for the universal is knowable by λόγος, the particular (τὸ καθ̓ ἕκαστον) by sensation, for the λόγος is of the universal and sensation of the individual (τοῦ κατὰ μέρος)), e.g. the great and the small [are more knowable] by λόγος, the rare and the dense by sensation.
(188b30–189a9)
This is in an obvious sense praising Plato (and some more or less kindred philosophers) over most Presocratic physicists: to identify all formal ἀρχαί with heat would be a childish mistake like calling all men ‘papa’.49 Aristotle’s language here is reminiscent of the passage cited above from Posterior Analytics I 2, where ‘the things that are closer to sensation’, namely ‘the particulars’, are ‘prior and more knowable to us’, while ‘the things that are more remote [from sensation]’, namely ‘the things that are most universal’, are ‘prior and more knowable without qualification’ (72a1–5). But here in Physics I 5, without any explicit criticisms of the Platonists, Aristotle is implicitly distancing himself from
Page 25 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
         
The Path to the Principles
 them too, and reducing them to the same level as their opponents; while he says that the Platonists’ more universal ἀρχαί are ‘more knowable by λόγος’ (and less knowable by sensation), he strikingly fails to say that they are ‘more knowable
by nature’ or ‘more knowable without qualification’. A more universal
description of the ἀρχή is better than a too-restrictive particular description like
‘the hot’, but we should not think of it as a single universal ἀρχή. (And if, in
trying to reduce all ἀρχαί filling the same analogical role to a single universal
ἀρχή, we label all privative ἀρχαί as ‘the great and the small’ or ‘the unequal’,
that may not be much better than labelling them all ‘the cold’.) There may
indeed be a single universal ἀρχή, i.e. an ἀρχή that is a cause of some attribute universally predicated of a very broad domain, while more particular ἀρχαί are causes of the distinctive attributes of its subdomains; but, if so, the ἀρχή-universally- described is not that single universal ἀρχή. We reach the first material ἀρχή of all sublunar bodies (but not of the heavens) by reasoning back from the manifest natural things first to their anhomoemerous parts, then to their homoeomerous parts, then to earth, water, air, and fire, then to what underlies the intertransformations of these four simple bodies—not by a single leap to ‘matter’
as what is common to all cases of material causality. Likewise, we reach the first efficient ἀρχή, not by grasping the universal concept of efficient cause, but by reasoning back step by step to the first efficient cause of all coming-to-be (the sun, or (p.51) the mover of its yearly motion), or to the first efficient cause of all motion (the mover of the daily motion of the whole heaven).
Physics I 1 tells us that the ἀρχή-universally-described is the starting point of the path, more knowable to us, and not, as Plato thinks and as Posterior Analytics I 2 might suggest, the ending point, most knowable in itself.50 The contrast between Aristotle’s and his Platonist rivals’ modes of argument is nicely illustrated by the text on the ἀρχαί which Sextus Empiricus (AM X 248–83, esp. 262–76) attributes to ‘the Pythagoreans’, but which he is clearly taking from an Old Academic or neo-Pythagorean (Old Academic-influenced) source. These ‘Pythagoreans’ start by arguing that everything falls into one of three classes, being said either per se, by contrariety, or correlatively. Then they argue that anything in each of these classes, if it is not the summum genus in that class, must be posterior to the summum genus in that class, because the species is destroyed when the genus is destroyed, but not vice versa. But these summa genera, which are prior to all other things, are either themselves the one (the summum genus of things said per se) or the dyad (excess and deficiency, the summa genera of correlatives), or else they are posterior to the one and the dyad (like the equal and the unequal, which are the summa genera of contraries). And so, the ‘Pythagoreans’ conclude, everything else will be posterior to the one and the dyad, and so the one and the dyad are the ἀρχαί of all things. These ‘Pythagoreans’, then, think that by taking the ἀρχαί under the most universal descriptions, as summa genera, they will reach the ἀρχαί that are the first of all things universally. And they think that they can formulate the οὐσία of these
Page 26 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 things, not merely their causal role in relation to other things but what they are in themselves, by calling them ‘the one’ and ‘the dyad’. This is what Aristotle means by calling all men ‘papa’ and all women ‘mama’, and he is trying to educate us away from it in the Physics, and in all the physical treatises. Already in Physics I he has distinguished matter from privation, and distinguished the ἀρχαί of substantial change (and thus of those (p.52) substances which come- to-be) from the ἀρχαί of non-substantial change, even if he is not yet in a position to give a criterion for when a change is substantial. And subsequent books, in the Physics and beyond, will have much more to say in making the ἀρχαί more precise, drawing further distinctions among them (for instance, distinguishing matter from place in Physics IV), critically examining inadequate accounts of the ἀρχαί or of things that claim to be ἀρχαί, and finally bringing us to the first causes of motion and coming-to-be.
Notes:
(1) On this chapter, and Physics I generally, the best ancient commentaries are those of Simplicius (CAG IX) and Alexander (lost, but Simplicius generally reports its contents). There is also the commentary of John Philoponus (CAG XVI), and the brief paraphrase of Themistius (CAG V, 2), which tends to dodge controversial issues of interpretation. (There was also a commentary by Porphyry, which Simplicius often reports.) The most important medieval commentaries are Averroes’ Long Commentary, lost in Arabic but extant in Hebrew and Latin translations (the Latin is available in volume 4 of the Juntine edition, Averroes 1550) and Thomas Aquinas 1954. Both of these texts are easily found online. Much of the Arabic commentary literature is summarized in Lettinck 1994. Of recent literature, the most useful source on book I in general is Horstschäfer 1998. On chapter 1 in particular, see Mansion 1979, Bolton 1991, Angioni 2001, Cerami 2009, and Falcon 2018.
(2) For Alexander and Simplicius on εἰδέναι and ἐπίστασθαι see Simplicius In Physics 12,14–13,13. I am provisionally translating γνωρίζειν as ‘recognize’: I’ll discuss another possible interpretation below. Burnyeat 2012 has some discussion of Alexander and Simplicius on how the verbs are related in this sentence, as well as much on the relations between εἰδέναι and ἐπίστασθαι and γιγνώσκειν more generally, and between the different nouns that may or may not correspond to these verbs.
(3) At 184a11, ὧν εἰσὶν ἀρχαὶ ἢ αἴτια ἢ στοιχεῖα, it seems that grammatically the antecedent of ὧν can only be the preceding τὰς μεθόδους; but we might want to say that there is a slight anacoluthon, and that Aristotle really means to refer back to the things we know, which are the objects of these disciplines.
(4) See Simplicius 13,14–21 and 14,9–28.
Page 27 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 (5) See Simplicius 13,21–33 and 10,8–24 and 11,16–12,5; on Simplicius on causes vs. στοιχεῖα, see discussion below.
(6) Codex E is available at the website of the Bibliothèque Nationale: <http:// gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b84192492>. The subtitle περὶ ἀρχῶν (in a later hand) is not easy to read, and there may be something else there too; περὶ αἰτίων at the beginning of book II is clear. Ross is apparently wrong in reporting that Codex F gives Ἀριστοτέλους φυσικῆς ἀκροάσεως ἢ περὶ ἀρχῶν Α. This page is available at: <http://teca.bmlonline.it/ImageViewer/servlet/ImageViewer? idr=TECA0001111841#page/1/mode/1up> and it seems to say only Ἀριστοτέλους φυσικῆς ἀκροάσεως Α, although there is water damage and an illegible scholium. I thank Pantelis Golitsis and Henry Mendell for advice, and Pantelis for looking at Codex F in situ.
(7) Warning: book II says almost nothing about privation, mentioning it only at Physics II 1, 193b19–21.
(8) For the first thought see Physics II 7, 198a24–7, and for the second 198a27– 31 and 198a35-b4.
(9) Presumably it is the first four books which are plausibly called Περὶ ἀρχῶν. But Adrastus is making the mistake of the Peripatetic tradition beginning with Andronicus, until Porphyry corrected it, of putting the break after Physics V rather than after Physics IV. I think Ross’s diagnosis of the mistake in his editio maior (Ross 1936, 1–4) is right: they knew from early Peripatetic references that the broader Physics contained a treatise called περὶ ἀρχῶν or φυσικὰ or περὶ φύσεως followed by a treatise περὶ κινήσεως, but they also had references (at least that of Damas, cited by Simplicius In Physica 924,12–14) to a three-book περὶ κινήσεως; so they assumed that the περὶ κινήσεως must be the last three books of the Physics, and that the rest was the περὶ ἀρχῶν or φυσικὰ proper. But in reality the three-book περὶ κινήσεως must have been Physics V, VI, and VIII. (Codex E, very strangely, guesses that Physics VII, VI, and VIII in that order are the three books of the περὶ κινήσεως.) Porphyry drew the correct division I–IV/ V–VIII (Simplicius In Physica 802,7–13), and was followed not only by Philoponus (In Physica 2,13–3,10) but also by Simplicius himself in his earlier De Caelo commentary (226,19–23), but Simplicius goes back to the older tradition in his Physics commentary: see his discussions, and his references to earlier writers, 4,11–16 and 801,13–802,13 and 923,7–924,16.
(10) Here I have spoken of Physics I–IV as a unified treatise on the ἀρχαί of natural things. There are some clear indications for this, but there are also problems about the internal unity of Physics I–IV. I have written about this in an unpublished paper, ‘Physics II and its Relation to Physics I–IV’; let me here briefly summarize the problem. Physics I seems to look forward to Physics II, in that: (i) the end of Physics I 9 as we have it can only be a transition to Physics II;
Page 28 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 (ii) Physics I 7, 191a19–20 ‘whether the form or the ὑποκείμενον is οὐσία is not yet clear’ refers ahead to Physics II 1, which resolves the issue; and (iii) while Physics I says that we are investigating the ἀρχαί of natural things, its argument is not in fact restricted to natural as opposed to artificial things (it never defines what things are natural, and never uses any premise about natural things beyond that they change or come-to-be), and thus seems to be looking forward to Physics II, which defines natural things and narrows the investigation to them (see discussion below). So too the beginning of Physics III, which lays out the program for III–IV, clearly refers back to the II 1 definition of nature (200b12– 13), and attaches itself to the μέθοδος περὶ φύσεως (200b13). On the other hand, Physics II never refers back to Physics I, and there are several apparent discrepancies if Physics I has preceded it; and Physics II seems, like Parts of Animals I 1 to which it is often a longer parallel, to be introducing a physics of form and final causality, which fits badly with Physics III–VIII. My conclusion has been that Physics II was originally an independent monobiblion, perhaps a sequel to On Philosophy; Aristotle subsequently decided to incorporate this monobiblion into a longer treatise on the ἀρχαί of natural things, Physics I–IV, and wrote the longer proemium Physics I for that occasion. I also suggest that the original proemium to Physics II when it was a monobiblion is still preserved (since no one had the heart to throw it out), namely as Metaphysics α 3. (The suggestion about α 3 had also been made, independently and almost certainly before me, in an unpublished paper by Daniel de Montmollin.)
(11) Democritus may have said γράμματα rather than στοιχεῖα, but in any case he used the letters-comparison. See Aristotle, On Generation and Corruption I 2, 315b6–15, where Democritus said either that a tragedy and a comedy come to be from the same letters, or that τραγῳδία and τρυγῳδία (an archaic word for comedy) come to be from the same letters except one: for the emendation from κωμῳδία to τρυγῳδία see West 1969. For Plato on στοιχεῖα or γράμματα see Menn 1998. The sixth and ninth aporiai of Metaphysics Β (Β 3, 998a20-b14, Β 4, 999b24–1000a4) seem to compare and contrast a Democritean with a Platonic application of the letters-analogy.
(12) On these issues see Menn 2001.
(13) For Eudemus and Alexander see Simplicius In Physica 10,8–24. Thomas Aquinas ad locum follows Alexander in identifying the ἀρχή with the efficient cause, the cause with the final and formal causes, the στοιχεῖον with the material cause. Averroes ad locum follows Alexander in identifying the ἀρχή with the efficient cause, and the ‘cause’ with the final cause, but agrees with Simplicius against Alexander in identifying the στοιχεῖον with the material and formal causes. (I don’t mean that Simplicius was Averroes’ source—as far as we know Simplicius’ commentary wasn’t translated into Arabic.)
Page 29 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 (14) This picks up the tenth aporia of Β, Β 4, 1000a5–1001a3, cited at Λ 10, 1075b13–14: if both corruptable and eternal things are composed out of eternal ἀρχαί, why are some of their compounds corruptible and others not?
(15) Reading [στοιχεῖον οὐκ ἔστιν] ἀρχή τις οὖσα (fallen out by saut du même au même from ἱστὰν to ἐστιν?), or Jaeger’s conjecture ἀρχή τις οὖσα [οὐκ ἔστι στοιχεῖον], for the ἀρχή τις οὖσα printed and obelized by Jaeger, and transmitted (according to the apparatus of Alexandru 2014) by virtually all manuscripts other than Ab (E, J, M, C, and the whole δ family), and apparently presupposed by both Arabic versions. Ross’s ἀρχή τις καὶ οὐσία, transmitted apparently only in Ab (and, according to Alexandru, presupposed by Bessarion’s translation) is pretty clearly wrong, a scribal attempt to fix the damage.
(16) Simplicius In Physica 10,8–24 and 11,16–23. Simplicius adds, following Proclus, that matter and form are not properly causes but συναίτια (11,29–32)— it seems bizarrely un-Aristotelian to say that form is not a true cause, but Simplicius, like Proclus, distinguishes the ‘formal cause’, an immanent form, from the ‘paradigmatic cause’, a separate form, and thinks that only the latter leads up to the first ἀρχαί. (For Proclus on αἴτια and συναίτια see notably his In Timaeum I,2,1–3,23 and In Parmenidem 888,15–35; followed also by Philoponus, In Physica 5,7–16, a clear statement.) When Aristotle says that to know a thing scientifically we must know τὰ αἴτια τὰ πρῶτα καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς τὰς πρώτας καὶ μέχρι τῶν στοιχείων, Simplicius suggests that this means not that we must know the first causes and principles all the way up to the στοιχεῖα, but that we must know both the first or highest principles, which are the first causes, and all the way down to the last or lowest principles, the στοιχεῖα, which are not properly causes at all (11,32–12,5); both Averroes and Thomas follow this fairly bizarre suggestion. (I take it, instead, that both καί's are epexegetic, paraphrasable as: ‘to know the first causes that explain a given thing, we must trace it back to the first beginnings, I mean all the way back to the στοιχεῖα’. Aristotle is critical elsewhere of describing the first ἀρχαί of a thing as its στοιχεῖα, with the possible implication that they are its constituents, but he is not being critical of that description here.)
(17) E.g. can we infer from the fact of coming-to-be that there is a single eternally persisting ὑποκείμενον? That the contraries between which a change takes place must already exist before the change? That there must be a non- being from which coming-to-be begins?
(18) In πέφυκε ... ἡ ὁδός, I suppose that ὁδός is effectively the verbal noun of ἰέναι, so the sense is ‘we naturally go’, ‘the direction we naturally go in is ... ’.
(19) On Aristotle on προάγειν, see Menn 2012, 220, n38, with primary and secondary references.
Page 30 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 (20) This English version keeps a syntactic ambiguity about the role of μᾶλλον: (i) the confused things, rather (or more) than the unconfused ones, are evident and clear to us; or (ii) ‘rather confused’ (or more confused) things are evident and clear to us. In support of the latter construal, Andrea Falcon points to Historia Animalium I 15: Μάλιστα δ’ ἔχει διωρισμένα πρὸς τοὺς κατὰ φύσιν τόπους τὰ ἄνω καὶ κάτω ἄνθρωπος τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων· τά τε γὰρ ἄνω καὶ κάτω πρὸς τὰ τοῦ παντὸς ἄνω καὶ κάτω τέτακται. Τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον καὶ τὰ πρόσθια καὶ τὰ ὀπίσθια καὶ τὰ δεξιὰ καὶ τὰ ἀριστερὰ κατὰ φύσιν ἔχει. Τῶν δ’ ἄλλων ζῴων τὰ μὲν οὐκ ἔχει, τὰ δ’ ἔχει μὲν συγκεχυμένα δ’ ἔχει μᾶλλον (494a26–32).
(21) Someone at the Symposium suggested the possibility of taking διαιροῦσι as a finite verb, so that ὕστερον δ̓ ἐκ τούτων γίγνεται γνώριμα τὰ στοιχεῖα καὶ αἱ ἀρχαὶ διαιροῦσι ταῦτα would mean ‘starting from these, the στοιχεῖα become knowable, and the ἀρχαί divide these’. This is grammatically possible, but I have not been able to do anything with it.
(22) Here the manuscript (of Iamblichus’ Protrepticus) has the obviously impossible στοιχεῖα δὲ τῶν ὀνομαζομένων συλλαβῶν. I read, with Düring’s apparatus to B33 (in Düring 1961, 60), στοιχείων δ̓ αἱ ὀνομαζóμεναι συλλαβαί, following the suggestion of a marginal scholium in Iamblichus (but the scholium is proposing this as the underlying syntax, not as an emendation). The alternative would be to write συλλαβαὶ δὲ τῶν ὀνομαζομένων στοιχείων.
(23) Aristotle does not explicitly make the point here that we can know the στοιχεῖα without knowing the composites, but he does notably at Rhetoric II 24, 1401a28–31, scorning ‘Euthydemus’ argument, e.g. he knows that there is a trireme in the Piraeus, because he knows each of these (sc. trireme and Piraeus), and the person who knows the στοιχεῖα knows the ἔπος, for the ἔπος is the same (as its constituent στοιχεῖα)’. (Aristotle also cites ‘the argument (λόγος) of Euthydemus’ at SE 20, 177b12–13. The source may be Euthydemus 277a1–b1, arguing that you learn what you already know, since when you learn some exercise it is just a lot of letters and you already know all the letters. But in both the Rhetoric and the SE the ‘λόγος of Euthydemus’ seems to involve an argument about knowing triremes in the Piraeus, which is not in the Euthydemus.)
(24) Presumably this is in turn Aristotle’s development of the Meno suggestion that we can start with true δóξα that p and be guided by it to knowledge, which we will reach by reasoning out the cause why p.
(25) On a good-itself which is a cause to the other things of their being good, see NE I 4, 1095a26–8. It may not be clear in the NE whether Aristotle himself accepts such a good-itself, but he clearly does in EE I 8 (compare 1217b2–5 with 1218b10–14), although it is not an Idea of the Good (1218b7–10), and is introduced as a (final) cause only of goods achievable for humans.
Page 31 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 (26) On starting from agreed-on substances in investigating non-sensible substances, compare Metaphysics Η 1 1042a22–5; on starting from agreed-on goods in trying to ‘show the good-itself’, compare EE I 8, 1218a15–24.
(27) Taking ταῦτα in 1129b4 to refer back to the things that are good without qualification in b3. Alternatively, with Barnes in the Revised Oxford Translation (Barnes 1984), we could read ταὐτά, ‘people pray for and pursue the same things’, when they should pursue one set of things in their practice, while praying for something better.
(28) This point has been a theme of Robin Smith’s work. Smith emphasizes in
 particular the foundations in Aristotle’s syllogistic: if we collect all the truths in a
 given domain, and then try to work their inferential relationships, we will
 discover some A- and E-predications that are ἄμεσα, ‘immediate’ or ‘unmiddled’
 in the sense that there are no middle terms, distinct from the two extremes, that
 would allow us to validly infer the proposition from any other two true
 propositions. Mastering the science involves, not just working forward to
 discover new truths, but working backward to discover what are the unmiddled
 true propositions within the domain, and what inferential relations (chains of
 syllogisms) allow us to derive the other true propositions from them. This
 reflects something about the historical development of Greek geometry and
 allied sciences, but also turns on technical peculiarities of Aristotle’s syllogistic,
 which lie behind the arguments of the Posterior Analytics against circles or
 infinite regresses of deductions. See Smith 1993, 2009a, and 2009b.
 (29) Γνωρίζειν can in fact be a ternary relation, with an indirect object, as at Prometheus Bound 486–7, where for S to γνωρίζειν X to T is to make T familiar with X or able to recognize X or able to use X as a sign.
(30) Thus Bonitz in the Index Aristotelicus (Bonitz 1870) under γνωρίζειν, notes that ‘alicubi γνωρίζειν videri potest idem significare ac γνώριμον ποιεῖν, δηλοῦν’, but concludes that the distinction cannot be maintained, that ‘omnino et significatione et usus ambitu γνωρίζειν et γινώσκειν vix possunt inter se distingui, ac pro synonymis vel in eodem sententiae contextu vel in iisdem formulis γνωρίζειν, γιγνώσκειν, γνῶσιν λαμβάνειν, μανθάνειν, εἰδέναι, ἐπίστασθαι leguntur’. After trying to impose the distinction on Posterior Analytics I 1, I 2, and II 19, and Metaphysics Α 1, I am inclined to agree with Bonitz.
(31) Throughout this passage Aristotle is trying to show that ‘from all the things which have been mentioned [i.e. all the distinguishing characteristics of wisdom and the wise person] the desired name [sc. ‘wisdom’] will belong to the same science, for it must contemplate the first ἀρχαί and causes’ (982b7–10); the argument that this science will be most universal must be intended to support this conclusion. When Aristotle says ‘the first things and the causes are most
Page 32 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 knowable, for the other things are known on account of these and out of these, not these things through the ὑποκείμενα’ (982b2–4, cited above), ὑποκείμενον seems to mean what is ‘subject’ to a cause, but at 982a23, where the person with universal knowledge ‘in some way knows all the ὑποκείμενα’, it seems to mean the subject of a universal. Aristotle seems not to perceive a tension, but that doesn’t mean that he’s confusing the universal–particular relation with the cause–effect relation: rather, if e.g. the sun is the cause of growth, then whatever is the subject of the universal ‘growing thing’ will be subject to the sun as cause, and the only way to have scientific knowledge of the ὑποκείμενα of the predicate will be to know what causes the ὑποκείμενα to have that predicate.
(32) Simplicius handles the problem by distinguishing two kinds of universals, one more knowable by nature and less knowable to us, which is a cause to the individuals, the other easily known to us by abstraction and posterior in re to the individuals. (On this see Menn 2010, and, on the neo-Platonic discussions lying behind Simplicius, Helmig 2012.) Philoponus prefers to speak of the more- knowable-to-us universal as a vague particular, e.g. the thing approaching which is recognized as an animal before it is recognized as a human, and recognized as a human before it is recognized as Socrates (In Physica 10,28–11,23, with defence through 13,14). Thomas resolves the conflict between Physics I 1 and Posterior Analytics I 2 by saying that the Analytics means by ‘singularia’ (καθ̓ ἕκαστα) sensible individuals, which are more knowable to us than universals because sensation is prior for us to intellection, whereas Physics I 1 means by καθ̓ ἕκαστα the infimae species, and by ‘universals’ the higher universals, so that in Physics I 1 he would be drawing a distinction within the realm of intelligible things rather than a distinction between intelligibles and sensibles. For Thomas, all the things that are called less-knowable-in-themselves involve some sort of potentiality, and are therefore of themselves only potentially intelligible; for this reason, they need the activity of the agent intellect to make them actually intelligible.
(33) On these themes in Plato see Menn 1998.
(34) Or, in codex E (and Simplicius In Physica 208,29–32), εἰς τὰ καθ’ ἕκαστα.
(35) ὑπολαμβάνει is in codex I, in the Arabic (which has ‘the child at first supposes of each man it sees that he is its father, and of each woman that she is its mother’), and in codex E ante correctionem. προσαγορεύει is in the other manuscripts that Ross reports for Physics I (F, J, E post correctionem) and is presupposed by Simplicius In Physica 17,16 (καλοῦσι) and Themistius In Physica 2,18; but Philoponus In Physica 11,21 (νομίζει, and context 11,19–23) seems to presuppose ὑπολαμβάνει. A passage of Calcidius In Timaeum 208–9 (in Waszink 1962, 225–6), citing Aristotle, may be referring to Physics I 1, 184b12–14, but, because it cites things that are not in our passage (notably, Aristotle calling adults who think that doing injustice is beneficial senes pueros), it is often taken
Page 33 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 to be reporting an exoteric work which Aristotle would presumably also be drawing on in Physics I 1. (Ross in his Aristotelis Fragmenta Selecta (Ross 1955) prints some of the text as Protrepticus Fr. 17.) Either way, Calcidius has Aristoteles ... dicens initio pueros etiamnum lactentis aetatis omnes quidem viros putare patres, omnes autem feminas matres, apparently reflecting ὑπολαμβάνει—and these children are probably too young to be calling anyone anything. (But Calcidius may well not be looking directly at any work of Aristotle’s, but rather taking this from Porphyry’s commentary on the Physics, or from a parallel in Porphyry’s commentary on the Timaeus. Porphyry may also be the source of Philoponus’ paraphrase with νομίζει.) There was lively discussion at the Symposium about προσαγορεύει or ὑπολαμβάνει, about the age of the children that Aristotle is thinking of, and about whether the children are addressing all women as ‘mama’ (or thinking that the women are their mother) or are saying or thinking that the women are someone’s mother (not having the linguistic or conceptual resources to distinguish ‘a woman’ from ‘a mother’). Some participants urged that no child, or at any rate no child old enough to talk, could confuse other women with its own mother, and therefore that, at least if προσαγορεύει is right, Aristotle must mean merely that they say or think of each woman that she is a mother, someone’s mother. But in fact, if Aristotle wrote προσαγορεύει, he could be describing the phenomenon of ‘overextension’, much discussed in the recent child-language literature since Clark 1973. This literature gives many examples of children who start by calling all women or all women who help take care of them (and sometimes even their fathers) ‘mama’, and then gradually narrow down until this means only their mother. ‘Overextension’ seems typical of children aged 1 or 2 years; children this age can certainly distinguish their mother from other women, but may not yet have a vocabulary with both a broader and a narrower term. (A child may learn to make distinctions in various ways, e.g. by saying ‘mama’ with an accent on the penult for its mother and on the ultima for its father.) There is also a phenomenon, discussed by Piaget 1928, 74–107 (esp. 106–7), where a child may have difficulty in applying relative terms, which Piaget diagnoses as a difficulty grasping how things would seem from someone else’s point of view: a child may say that all boys are ‘brothers’ (of someone), perhaps also that no adults are brothers. But this happens at a much later stage (Piaget’s informants here are typically 7–9 years old), probably not what Aristotle’s diminutive παιδία, ‘little children’, would pick out: 1-to-2-year-olds are not using relative terms at all. Aristotle in Generation of Animals I 2 says that ‘we call an animal male if it generates in another, female if it generates in itself; which is why in the universe too, they think of (νομίζουσιν—perhaps “worship”) the nature of the earth as a female and mother, but address (προσαγορεύουσιν) the heaven and the sun or anything else like this as generators and fathers’ (716a13–17). This might just mean that heaven and earth are popularly represented as the father and mother of the other gods, or of vegetation, but it looks as if the worshippers are addressing
Page 34 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  
The Path to the Principles
 heaven as ‘Father’, i.e. conceiving of it as having generated themselves as well as other things. There are, of course, many examples of this.
(36) With Heiberg deleting the MSS’s phrase ‘which is called the circumference’ after ‘single [curved] line’ and the MSS’s phrase ‘towards the circumference of the circle’ after ‘falling’.
(37) Alternatively, if we take the ‘confused things’ at 184a21–2 more broadly and not as already implying wholes, Aristotle is taking up the old premise that we must begin from the things that are better known to us by sensation, and adding two new premises, that wholes are better known to sensation and that universals are wholes. The conclusion is the same.
(38) Averroes, likewise, speaks repeatedly of going from composites to simples, and uses ‘confused’ and ‘composite’ as interchangeable.
(39) Perhaps to put it another way: when he speaks of things that are συγκεχυμένα, are these the mixtures (which are mixed and thus difficult to know clearly) or their ingredients (which are mixed with each other and thus difficult to know clearly)? Ross says that ‘what Aristotle says of the actual method of physics is that it is one of analysis of the confused data of experience into their elements (a21–3), and at the same time one of coming to recognize the specific nature of that whose generic nature alone is at first recognized (a23–6); these two features not being clearly distinguished from each other’ (Ross 1936, 458). I would prefer to say that the former is proceeding to the ἀρχαί (from ‘confused’ or compounded objects—Ross’s ‘confused data of experience’ may be misleading, Aristotle isn’t analysing experience as Kant or James Mill will do), while the latter is going from a vague to a more precise conception of the ἀρχαί.
(40) But, as I suggested in a note above, it is entirely possible that Physics II initially existed on its own, and that Physics I was written later as a proemium to Physics II, or to a larger whole Physics I–IV.
(41) The immediate target of the criticism is presumably the Timaeus account of
 the Receptacle, where if things change into each other, like fire and air or like
 triangles and squares shaped out of gold, then what perishes and what comes-to-
 be can at best be called τοιοῦτον, while ‘that in which they each appear when
 they come to be, and out of which again they perish [namely the receptacle]—
 only this [should be] referred to using the words τοῦτο and τόδε’ (49e7–50a2): so
 that, when we point to sensible fire or to a golden triangle, the gold or the
 Receptacle is what it is, while fiery or triangular is only what it is like. But
 Aristotle would probably think that Plato is just being unusually explicit about
 what most people implicitly assume.
Page 35 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
   
The Path to the Principles
 (42) See Aristotle’s criticism of the Timaeus’ gold analogy at GC II 1, 329a13–21;
 and see Metaphysics Θ 7, where Aristotle insists (implicitly against the Timaeus)
 that when something comes-to-be by a substantial change out of matter X, it
 should be called ‘X-en’ (saying what it is like) rather than ‘X’ (saying what it is).
 (43) I see no good reason for Ross’s deletion (following Diels) of the words ἡ ὕλη καὶ, with Simplicius’ quasi-quotation at In Physica 226,6–9. Ὕλη here means the raw material of craft-production or its analogue. This is only the fifth occurrence of ὕλη in the Physics; Aristotle does not start routinely using it as a name for one kind of ἀρχή until I 9. Ross is wrong to expect that ὕλη will be reserved for that use here.
(44) So too in the next sentence, 191a12–13, where ‘this [sc. what plays the role of matter] is one ἀρχή, without being one, or being, in the way that τόδε τι is’. The syntax is compressed and the sense may be controversial, but I take the thought to be that this ‘one’ ἀρχή we’ve discovered (‘one’ in the sense that it and the form and the privation are three), is not like (say) the Receptacle of the Timaeus, a single τόδε underlying all natural things, nor indeed is it a τόδε in any case, whether a single τόδε for all or different τάδε for different natural things.
(46) Aristotle in the Physics is very much aware of the Posterior Analytics II methodology, proceeding from εἰ ἔστι to τί ἐστι, even where he deviates from it. (Thus at II 1, 193a3–4 he excuses himself from trying to show that nature exists, as the methodology seems to dictate, since this is too obvious to need showing (contrast chance, II 4, 195b35–6). At III 4, 202b35–6 he says that we must investigate about the infinite ‘whether it is or not, and, if it is, what it is’; the same formulation about place (with an added ‘and how it is’) at the beginning of IV 1, about void at the beginning of IV 6, and a verbal variant about time at the beginning of IV 10. Even Physics VIII can be described this way: at De Motu Animalium 1, 698a10–11 he refers back to an investigation ‘about eternal motion, whether it is or is not, and if it is, what it is’.) Physics II 1 gives a close parallel with the investigation of the ἀρχαί: rather than trying to give a definition that would specify a cause of nature, we investigate natural things, grasp what they have in common that differentiates them from non-natural things such as artefacts, and so bring to light what nature is by grasping it as a certain kind of cause (an internal principle of motion) present in natural things. The investigation of chance and spontaneity in II 4–6, and perhaps some of the
Page 36 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
(45) The pre-Aristotelian doxography seems to have formulated the question as
 how many beings there are for each philosopher, but Aristotle argues that the
 question how many ἀρχαί there are amounts to the same (Physics I 2, 184b22–5).
 On the tradition of doxography classifying the philosophers by how many beings
 they posited, see Mansfeld 1990.
                    
The Path to the Principles
 investigations in III–IV, are similar; and grasping what eternal motion is, in VIII, also brings its cause to light, in the final chapter VIII 10.
(47) This is not only what Aristotle says Plato does in Physics I 9 but also what Plato actually does, notably in the third Hypothesis of the Parmenides, where we discover the original nature of the others by stripping away all attributes which they acquire by participation in the one (including unity and finite multiplicity), concluding that ‘there comes to be, in the things other than the one, from the combination of the one with themselves, something else that gives them a limit (πέρας) in relation to each other, whereas their own nature gives them unlimitedness (ἀπειρία) in themselves (καθ̓ ἑαυτά)’ (158d3–6). With the Receptacle too, Plato separates it from everything it receives from the forms or from the demiurge, and assumes that what it would be when so separated is what it is by its essence.
(48) On the interpretation of this passage and its context see my discussion in Menn forthcoming (section IIIβ1 in the draft available on the internet) and in Menn 2011, 173 n. 13 and the text above it.
(49) ‘We too, as long as we discern things by following what is coarse and confused in sensory cognitions, are in no way unlike young children who call all the men they meet fathers’ (Simplicius In Physica 17,18–21).
(50) Compare De Anima II, where we must start by ‘trying to determine what soul is and what is its most universal λόγος’ (II 1, 412a4–6); ‘if we must say something universal to every soul, it would be the first actuality of an instrumental natural body’ (II 1, 412b4–6, cf. b10–11). But this is only a start: ‘let it thus have been determined in outline and sketched about soul; but since from what is unclear (ἀσαφές) but more obvious (φανερώτερον) there arises what is clearer and more knowable according to λόγος’ (II 1–2, 413a9–12), we need to go back again to say what soul is. The first definition is unclear partly because it does not state the cause (II 2, 413a13–20), but partly because it is so universal, like a universal definition applying to all polygonal figures (II 3, 414b20–5). To prove a geometrical proposition about all polygons (e.g. Euclid II 14, to square a given rectilinear figure) we need to prove it about triangles first and then about each successive kind of polygon, and to understand souls, or the living things of which they are ἀρχαί, we need to understand the different kinds of souls belonging to different kinds of living things. There is no ἀρχή ‘soul in general’: soul is like animal, where ‘the universal animal is either nothing or posterior’ (I 1, 402b5–9). (‘Universal’ is κοινóν in most of these passages, but καθόλου at I 1, 402b7 and I 2, 412b10, with no apparent difference in meaning.)
Access brought to you by:
Page 37 of 37
PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2019. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy).
  