# The Mathematical Origins of Aristotle’s Syllogistic

ROBIN SMITH
Communicated by J. VAN HEIJENOORT

In 1936, BENEDICT EINARSON called attention to a number of similarities, terminological and otherwise, between the language of ARISTOTLE’S logical writings and that of ancient Greek mathematics.¹ The significance of this research has not, I think, generally been recognized; indeed, EINARSON’S paper has not elicited much comment from other scholars.² I want to propose an interpretation of the syllogistic theory presented in *Prior Analytics* I.4–7 which takes account of EINARSON’S work. I claim that this syllogistic theory is more properly regarded as mathematics than as logic as understood by most contemporary logicians. These results, if correct, will require some major revisions in our interpretation of ARISTOTLE’S logical works and in our account of his development as a logician: in particular, the profusion of recent work³ interpreting the syllogistic by constructing formal models for it in the style of contemporary logic must be given a hard second look. Moreover, some questions will be raised about the place of the syllogistic theory in ARISTOTLE’S conception of logic. I would like to suggest what I think some of the answers might be, although this is a problem that must await further research.

EINARSON has gathered from the *Organon* an impressive list of terms with technical mathematical associations. Some of these terms concern the techniques

***

¹ “On Certain Mathematical Terms in Aristotle’s Logic,” *American Journal of Philology* 57 pp. 34–54, 151–172.
² Ross mentions it several times in the course of his commentary (*Aristotle’s Prior and Posterior Analytics* [Oxford 1947]), but without comment. PATZIG mentions it once (GÜNTHER PATZIG, *Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism*, trans. JONATHAN BARNES [Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1968] pp. 123–24).
³ Among the most important such studies are JAN ŁUKASIEWICZ, *Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic* (Oxford, 1951; second edition Oxford, 1957); GÜNTHER PATZIG, *Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism*, cited in previous note; KURT EBBINGHAUS, *Ein formales Modell der Syllogistik des Aristoteles* (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1964); LYNN E. ROSE, *Aristotle’s Syllogistic* (Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1968); JOHN CORCORAN, “A Mathematical Model for Aristotle’s Syllogistic,” *Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie* 55 (1973), pp. 191–219; T.J. SMILEY, “What is a Syllogism?”, *Journal of Philosophical Logic* 2 (1973) pp. 136–154.

***

202 R. SMITH

of proof and the structure of mathematical demonstrations; although these are significant for my thesis, I will not deal with them. Others are used in mathematics as terms for specifically mathematical notions and appear in ARISTOTLE with what appears to be a specifically logical technical sense. My interest is in a group of terms from the technical vocabulary of the theory of the syllogism in *Prior Analytics* I: ‘term’ (ὅρος), ‘extreme’ (ἄκρον); ‘major’ (μεῖζον), ‘middle’ (μέσον), ‘minor’ (ἔλαττον) as applied to ‘term’; ‘interval’ (διάστημα); and finally, certain terms concerning the insertion of middle terms, including ‘be inserted’ (παρεμπίπτειν), ‘be filled up’ (καταπυκνοῦσθαι). As EINARSON shows, these are all technical terms of the theory of harmony, which was for the Greeks a theory of proportions.⁴ Thus, ὅρος is ‘term’ in syllogistic and also ‘term of a ratio’ or ‘term of an interval’ in mathematics. In continued proportions or in harmonic relationships of three terms, the terms are designated μεῖζον, μέσον (and sometimes ἔλαττον), μέσον; the term μέσον, ARISTOTLE’S designation for the middle term of a syllogism, is standard mathematical terminology for ‘mean’ in any sense: arithmetic mean, geometric mean, harmonic mean. The term διάστημα, literally ‘interval’, which ARISTOTLE sometimes uses where we should expect ‘premiss’, is the technical term of harmonic theory for an interval and is also used to mean ‘ratio’. With respect to this last point, we should note that both in the theory of proportions and in harmony, the investigation of three-term relationships (e.g., continued proportions) is of considerable importance.

The term παρεμπίπτειν means ‘fall between’ or ‘be inserted’ in this sense; ARISTOTLE uses it similarly of middle terms inserted between two terms. Moreover, certain parts of *Prior Analytics* (I.26–28, principally) present us with a method for discovering mean terms with which to “join” two terms. Finally, in a passage in the *Posterior Analytics* (I.14) in which he is arguing that the first syllogistic figure is “most scientific”, ARISTOTLE uses the verb καταπυκνοῦσθαι of a process of “filling up” an interval with middle terms. This verb has a similar technical sense in harmony: filling up an interval with intermediate numbers.

Such terminological similarities can hardly be coincidental, but it is not immediately clear what we should make of them. EINARSON thought that ARISTOTLE was simply availing himself of a convenient technical language which had superficial resemblances with what he needed for the syllogistic: he saw no deeper connection. In my view, that would be surprising, considering the extent of the borrowing. I would rather claim that there is a direct attempt on ARISTOTLE’S part to develop a mathematical theory patterned after proportion theory and harmony. We can see more clearly what the relationship is if we compare a typical “proof” from the exposition of the syllogistic in *Prior Analytics* I.4–7 with a mathematical text. An appropriate text is the *Sectio Canonis* (Κατατομὴ Κανόνος) attributed to EUCLID, a work which reflects the state of fourth-century theorizing.⁵ First, a text from the treatment of the second figure in the *Analytics*:

***

⁴ Historically, it might be more accurate to say that Greek proportion theory developed as a descendant of Pythagorean harmonic theory. Such, at any rate, is the conclusion advocated in ÁRPÁD SZABÓ, *Anfänge der Griechischen Mathematik* (Munich: R. Oldenbourg, 1969), pp. 131–242.
⁵ Text in EUCLID, *Opera Omnia*, vol. VIII: *Scripta Musica et Fragmenta*, ed. H. MENGE

***

Aristotle’s Syllogistic 203

If the terms are universal, then, there will be a syllogism whenever the middle belongs to all of one and none of the other, whatever term the negative may be towards (πρὸς ὁποτερονοῦν ᾖ τὸ στερητικόν); otherwise, in no way. For let M be predicated of no N but of all X. Since, then, the negative converts, N will belong to none of M. But M was supposed to belong to all of X. Thus, N belongs to no X; for this was shown earlier. Again, if M belongs to all N and to no X, X will not belong to any N (for if M belongs to no X, X belongs to no M; but M belonged to all N; therefore, X belongs to no N; for it becomes again the first figure). But since the negative converts, neither will N belong to any X, so that it will be the same syllogism. (27a2–14)

Now, Proposition II from the *Sectio Canonis*:

If a multiple interval makes a certain interval when twice composed, that certain interval will itself also be multiple. Let BC be an interval, and let B be a multiple of C, and let it have come about that as C is to B, so B is to D. I say that D is a multiple of C. For since B is a multiple of C, therefore C measures B. But as C was to B, so also was B to D, so that C also measures D. Therefore, D is a multiple of C.

Each of these passages begins with a statement of what is to be proved (in ARISTOTLE, this corresponds to the moods *Cesare* and *Camestres*). In this statement, letters do not occur. Then, letters are introduced, using third-person imperatives (κατηγορείσθω in ARISTOTLE, ἔστω and γενήσθω in EUCLID), which “set out” the hypothesis of the theorem in a particular case. In EUCLID, this is the supposition of interval BC, where B is a multiple of C, and of a term D such that C:B::B:D. In ARISTOTLE, the hypothesis is that three terms M, N, and X in the second figure are so related that M is universal with respect to both N and X, negative with respect to one of them, and affirmative with respect to the other. In introducing terms, ARISTOTLE distinguishes two cases: (1) M belongs to no N and to all X; (2) M belongs to all N and to no X. After this, we have the proof itself, deducing the appropriate conclusion (using letters) from the premises as presented using letters. In EUCLID, this is that D is a multiple of C. In ARISTOTLE, the conclusion is that N belongs to no X. Within the proof we can note that, among other similarities, the imperfect is used to refer to a supposition made in the hypothesis as set out using letters: “But as C was to B, so also was B to D” in EUCLID, “But M was supposed to belong (ὑπέκειτο) to no X,” “But M belonged (ὑπῆρχεν) to all N” in ARISTOTLE.

These divisions correspond to the parts of a typical Euclidean theorem⁶ in both cases: we have the enunciation, the setting-out (ἔκθεσις), the proof (ἀπόδειξις), the conclusion. It is important to bear this in mind concerning

***

(Leipzig, 1916). Although the work itself appears to have been written not earlier than the third century, there are grounds for assigning the origin of much of its content to the fourth century. See SZABÓ, *Anfänge*, pp. 143–169, 231.
⁶ The traditional scheme of division is presented in PROCLUS, *In Primum Euclidis Elementorum Librum Commentarii*, ed. G. FRIEDLEIN (Leipzig, 1873), p. 203. See also THOMAS L. HEATH, *The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements*, 2 ed. (Cambridge, 1926), I, 129–131.

***

204 R. SMITH

ARISTOTLE’S use of letters, which some interpreters⁷ have taken as an epochal advance, making formal logic possible for the first time. We should note that there is a strong parallel between his use of letters and EUCLID’S. In particular, they occur only within the proof, not in the enunciation of what is to be proved. This is usually the rule in the *Prior Analytics*: ARISTOTLE states “syllogisms” without the use of letters (see 25b32–35, 26a17–21, 27a3–5, 27a26–32, 29a19–23), although his enunciations are sometimes incomplete and need supplementation from the setting-out in letters (28b15–19, 28b31–34). Often, in the enunciation he simply says “there will be a syllogism,” filling in the particular relation of the extremes in the setting-out. We should also note that in the summaries of results that appear several times (26a13–16, 26b26–28, 27a23–25, 38a1–3, 28a36–b4, 29a11–14) there is no use of letters. This suggests that letters are used here exactly as they are in mathematics. That use, in turn, is ultimately descended from their use in labelling diagrams, so let us consider briefly how a diagram is used in a geometrical proof. Roughly, the geometer says “Let ABC be a triangle”, or whatever, and then proceeds to show that ABC has some property or other. He then concludes that every triangle has this property. The inference is justified on the grounds that nothing was assumed about ABC except that it was a triangle and that therefore comparable results will follow for any other triangle.⁸ In terms of modern formal logic, this is analogous to treating these letters as free variables given a conditional interpretation: we should understand implicit (universal) quantifiers binding them whose scopes are the entire proof.⁹ As an examination of the texts will show, ARISTOTLE’S use of letters is of exactly this pattern.

Now, as I mentioned, ARISTOTLE’S use of letters has been taken by a number of commentators (beginning with ŁUKASIEWICZ) as the introduction of variables in the sense of modern formal logic. We have just seen that his use of letters is very much like their use in mathematics, so we should ask what the significant difference is: if we cannot find one, then ŁUKASIEWICZ’S view will give us the *Sectio Canonis*, and most Greek mathematical works, as logical treatises, which is surely going too far. I think, in fact, that we cannot find any such significant difference. If we claim that ARISTOTLE’S syllogistic is about certain propositions (namely those we get by substituting concrete terms for the letters), we can make the same claim for EUCLID. The above proposition, for instance, shows us that from a proposition of the form “B is a multiple of C and C:B::B:D” we can deduce a proposition of the form “D is a multiple of C;” or, we could read it as showing that every proposition of the form “If B is a multiple of C and C:B::B:D, then D is a multiple of C” is necessarily true (a theorem of the appropriate formal system, which we could set up, corresponding to EUCLID’S harmonic theory). However, no one would take this as evidence that the author of the *Sectio* was directly and explicitly interested in deductive relations among statements or in discovering theorem-schemata of a formal system: he was

***

⁷ Most notably ŁUKASIEWICZ, *Aristotle’s Syllogistic*, pp. 7–8.
⁸ See for instance PROCLUS, *In Primum Euclidis Elementorum*, p. 207 for an ancient exposition of this sort of view.
⁹ See e.g. S.C. KLEENE, *Introduction to Metamathematics* (Princeton, 1950), pp. 149–151.

***

Aristotle’s Syllogistic 205

investigating the relations of musical intervals in a mathematical theory. The fact that we could model his theory with a modern formal system is of mathematical interest, but it would be a serious historical distortion to see, say, evidence of Hilbertian formalism in the *Sectio Canonis* just on the basis of this possibility.

I claim that much the same situation obtains with respect to the assertoric syllogistic presented in *Prior Analytics* I.4–7.¹⁰ That theory is best construed as a mathematical theory concerning objects called ‘terms’ (ὅροι) and certain relations involving terms. The fact that ARISTOTLE uses letters as he does in itself no more makes him a logician than it does EUCLID or ARCHIMEDES. The fact that his theory can be modelled as a modern formal system of logic is likewise not a fair indication of what his syllogistic is in its historical context. To construe the syllogistic as a logical theory, we must find some syntactical objects—statements or arguments—with which it deals. We can find them here, but only as we could in the case of EUCLID’S mathematical work: we can take substitution instances of formulas containing letters. Then we must suppose that ARISTOTLE’S concern is precisely with those syntactical objects. In modern terminology, this requires referring to statements—using the formal mode of speech—rather than simply using them. Now, there are ways enough to do this in Greek. ARISTOTLE lacked quotation marks, but he could make equivalent use of the neuter article to nominalize a word, a phrase, or a sentence. With such devices, he could, for instance, have said “From the statement ‘A belongs to no B’ the statement ‘B belongs to no A’ follows.” However, he never does: he always uses the material mode of speech, talking about terms and their relations rather than statements.¹¹

In fact, he goes out of his way to talk about terms. He usually specifies what we call a syllogistic “mood” by describing some relationship of terms, frequently with the mathematical idiom οὕτως ἔχειν. For instance, he introduces the first figure as follows: “Whenever three terms are so related to one another (οὕτως ἔχωσι πρὸς ἀλλήλους) that the last is in the middle as a whole and the middle is either in or not in the first as a whole, it is necessary that there be a perfect syllogism of the extremes.” (25b32–35). He usually describes terms, not premisses (to which in fact he rarely refers), as ‘universal’ or ‘particular’, ‘affirmative’ or ‘negative’ with respect to another term: the use of πρὸς here emphasizes the importance of relations of terms. Once in this section, he uses the term διάστημα, ‘interval’, for such a relation (26b21). This term, borrowed from harmonic theory where it indicates the interval between two musical pitches of the

***

¹⁰ I limit my remarks to the assertoric syllogistic, rather than including the modal syllogistic of 8–22, primarily because I accept the general view of scholars that the modal theory is a later development. However, although there is more evidence in Chapters 8–22 that ARISTOTLE sees himself as studying relations of propositions, I think much of my argument still applies.
¹¹ The usual way to construct a name for an expression among later Greek writers on logic is to prefix the article τό to it; the article thus functions like quotation marks for modern logicians. This device is found in ARISTOTLE; see for instance *On Interpretation* 12, where we find such nominalizations as τὸ οὐκ ἄνθρωπος βαδίζει (21b7–8). Thus, its absence in *Prior Analytics* I.4–7 is all the more significant.

***

206 R. SMITH

‘interval’ (*i.e. ratio*) between the numbers representing them, most naturally suggests a relation between two things (in this case two terms); it is quite out of place as the designation of a proposition.

ARISTOTLE’S definitions of the three syllogistic figures reinforce the view that he was not concerned with syntactical objects. In defining the meanings of ‘major’, ‘minor’ and ‘middle’ for the terms in each figure, ARISTOTLE regularly refers to the ‘position’ of the middle term with respect to the extremes. In the first figure, it is “middle in position” (25b36), while in the second and third figures it is “outside the extremes” (26b39, 28a14), coming first in the second figure and last in the third. PATZIG interpreted these definitions by reference to “standard formulations” of the three figures, that is, to standardized forms for the enunciations of premiss pairs.¹³ Thus, in the first figure the standard form presents the terms in the order major-middle-minor (“If A belongs to all B and B belongs to no C ...”); in the second, the order is middle-major-minor (“If M belongs to all N and to no X ...”); and in the third, it is major-minor-middle (“If P belongs to no, and R to all, S ...”). Here, we seem to have a strictly syntactical criterion for determining which term is major, minor, or middle in each figure: ‘position’ means ‘position in the sentence’. However, ARISTOTLE does not adhere to these standard formulations in the enunciations of particular syllogisms (in the third figure, in fact, “standard formulations” are the exception). Consequently, a standard formulation would be useful only if there were procedures for determining what the standard formulation of any pair of syllogistic premisses would be. In my opinion, this undermines the purely syntactical character which the definitions seem to have.

Moreover, there is an alternative interpretation. ROSE argues that the definitions rest on a practice of representing syllogisms as arrays of three letters representing three terms.¹⁴ If we suppose that ARISTOTLE did use such diagrams, then appeal to a standard syntactical form is unnecessary, and the standard forms which we seem to find would only be a reflection of the diagrams. Such diagrams suggest a mathematical context much more than an argumentative one, especially when we remember that diagrams using letters are the hallmark of Greek mathematical proofs. Moreover, since nothing except the terms of a syllogism would appear in such a diagram, they clearly present the syllogism as a relation of three terms.¹⁵

The view of the syllogistic which I am advocating also allows us to draw a more satisfactory picture of the relation of that theory to ARISTOTLE’S theory of science as presented in the *Posterior Analytics*. If we take the syllogistic to be simply a logical theory, then the first impression a modern reader might get

***

¹² Of course, διάστημα means literally ‘distance’. SZABÓ argues that its meaning in music derives from the Pythagorean use of the κανών or monochord as a theoretical instrument (*Anfänge*, pp. 152–158).
¹³ *Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism*, Chapter IV, especially pp. 102–108.
¹⁴ *Aristotle’s Syllogistic*, pp. 16–24 and 133–136.
¹⁵ I believe that a close study of what is known about Greek proportion theory of the early fourth century might make it possible to reconstruct a mathematical theory which would show closer parallels with ARISTOTLE’S syllogistic figures. I hope to carry out such a reconstruction in a subsequent paper.

***

Aristotle’s Syllogistic 207

from the latter work is that the syllogistic is the underlying logic for deductive science. If this is what ARISTOTLE intended, it is difficult to see how he came to such a conclusion: as MUELLER¹⁶ has shown, the syllogistic is hopelessly inadequate to account for the argumentative procedures which occur in EUCLID, and we have no reason to suppose that those differ substantially from those employed by ARISTOTLE’S mathematical contemporaries. However, I think he may have had something else in mind: a mathematical theory of epistemology, ultimately derived from PLATO’S Theory of Forms. A theory of this sort is already suggested by the famous passage in *Republic* VI describing mathematics as in some way an image of true knowledge. PLATO there says that the “power of dialectic” makes use “only of Forms, going through Forms to Forms and ending with Forms” (511c1–2). This suggests that dialectic, whatever exactly PLATO may have conceived it to be, is somehow an art of operating with Forms or discerning relationships among Forms; the latter notion is given more substance in the *Sophist*. I think it is not impossible to see the syllogistic as just the mathematical theory of these relations of Forms. On the one hand, we should note that syllogistic terms are clearly supposed to be universals in some sense. Why not, then, see them as Forms? Moreover, we can discern traces of a Pythagorean tradition comparing, or even equating, the process of reasoning with the process of calculation. Significant here is Fragment 4 of PLATO’S Pythagorean friend ARCHYTAS, according to which λογιστικά, the ‘art of calculation’, is somehow superior to all other sciences¹⁷; it is not a long way from here to a view of science as a sort of extended calculating art with Forms, and I think we find a suggestion of that in the *Republic* passage cited. We also find PLATO making use of mean proportionals as causal ‘links’ in *Timaeus* 31c, a passage which could be read as providing just the inspiration necessary for the sort of mathematical epistemology I see behind the syllogistic. Indeed, there is a similarity between this (to us) improbable notion and ARISTOTLE’S own claim in the *Posterior Analytics* that in an ἀπόδειξις the middle term is somehow the cause of the relation of major and minor terms.

It remains to explain the relation I see between the syllogistic and ARISTOTLE’S other logical works, specifically the *Topics* and *On Sophistical Refutations* and the remainder of the *Prior Analytics*. All those works are concerned with argumentation, although the *Topics* and *On Sophistical Refutations* make no use of the syllogistic of the *Prior Analytics*. Recent researchers have generally followed BOCHEŃSKI¹⁸ in distinguishing a line of development in these works. To the first stage is assigned the *Topics* and *On Sophistical Refutations* (with *Topics* II–VII perhaps forming an even earlier stratum); the next stage is represented by *Prior Analytics* I.1–2 and 4–7 (the non-modal syllogistic); and a final and not entirely finished stage is presented in *Prior Analytics* I.3 and 8–22 (the modal syllogistic). BOCHEŃSKI has designated these

***

¹⁶ IAN MUELLER, “Greek Mathematics and Greek Logic,” in JOHN CORCORAN, ed., *Ancient Logic and Its Modern Interpretations* (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1974), pp. 35–70.
¹⁷ On the interpretation of this fragment, see W.R. KNORR, *The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements* (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975), pp. 92–93, 311.
¹⁸ I.M. BOCHEŃSKI, *A History of Formal Logic*, trans. IVO THOMAS (2 ed. New York: Chelsea, 1970), pp. 43–44.

***

208 R. SMITH

three stages ARISTOTLE’S ‘first’, ‘second’, and ‘third’ logics respectively. Throughout, ARISTOTLE is supposed to have been dealing with logic, that is, with the study of valid arguments; this is indicated by the occurrence of virtually identical definitions of “syllogism’ in the *Topics* and *Prior Analytics*. On this view, the relation between the *Prior Analytics* and the *Topics* is that the former work represents a more advanced stage of the same line of inquiry.

I am inclined to reject this view of ARISTOTLE’S development. The *Topics* is in fact a work which deals with syntactically describable patterns of argumentation all of the instances of which are valid arguments. Even though there is no formal procedure for demonstrating the validity of argument-forms given (ARISTOTLE simply presents us with forms, although he does use counterexamples sometimes to show invalidity), nevertheless I think this makes the *Topics* a logical study, if only a primitive one. Now, I have argued above that the syllogistic seems to have developed in a very different environment, namely the context of a mathematical epistemology. I think this is supported by the actual position of the syllogistic within the logical works. If the syllogistic is actually a later and more advanced theory of argumentation, supplanting that presented in the *Topics*, then it should simply take the place of its inadequate predecessor. This is not, however, how the Aristotelian text treats the relationship. Instead, both the *Topics* and the *Analytics* present us with a distinction between ‘demonstrative’ (ἀποδεικτικός) syllogisms and ‘dialectical’ (διαλεκτικός) syllogisms: supposedly, the *Analytics* deals with the former and the *Topics* with the latter. This suggests that in some way the works have different subject-matters. Here, however, ARISTOTLE’S official account seems to be incoherent. He claims, both in the *Topics* and in the *Prior Analytics*, that a demonstrative syllogism differs from a dialectical one *only* in the quality of its premisses: demonstrative premisses are ‘true and primary’ while dialectical premisses are ‘accepted’ (ἔνδοξος).¹⁹ According to this criterion, two arguments having identical logical forms might be respectively demonstrative and dialectical if their premisses differed in the appropriate ways. However, the actual subject of the *Topics* is not when the premisses of an argument are ἔνδοξα, but when the conclusion follows from the premisses: it is about validity, just as is the *Analytics*. The official distinction is apparently an attempt, and not altogether a successful one, to find places for both the syllogistic and the contents of the *Topics* within a common framework.²⁰

***

¹⁹ Most fully in *Topics* 100a27–b26, where he differentiates ‘demonstrative’, ‘dialectical’ and ‘eristical’ syllogisms on this basis. In the *Prior Analytics* (24a30–b12) he distinguishes demonstrative and dialectical premisses on the same basis. Interestingly, this criterion differs from that presented just before it (24a22–25), according to which a demonstrative premiss is a taking or assuming (αἴτησις) while a dialectical premiss is a questioning or request (ἐρώτησις). This suggests more than an epistemological distinction between dialectical and demonstrative syllogisms. The definition of ‘syllogistic premiss’ at 24a28–30 might be seen in this light as an attempt to find a common element in two rather diverse uses of the word πρότασις.
²⁰ Another possibility I have not discussed is that editorial hands have tried to fuse a somewhat diverse collection together into ARISTOTLE’S ‘system of logic’. In the three centuries between ARISTOTLE’S death and the appearance of ANDRONICUS’ ‘edition’,

***

Aristotle’s Syllogistic 209

I think that this common framework is something more like the conception of logic as a theory of argument implicit in the *Topics* than it is like the mathematical theory of epistemology which I claim underlies the syllogistic. In the later parts of the *Prior Analytics*, especially the second Book, we find a good many details linking the syllogistic to argumentative contexts (perhaps most obvious are the remarks in I.28–29 on finding a middle term and the suggestions for confusing one's opponent in II.19–20.) These are, in my view, later additions to the theory which try to make it into a logical theory rather than a mathematical one. That the syllogistic can so be used is of course obvious. However, the mathematical flavor of the exposition in I.4–22 does not seem like the sort of treatment that would derive from a study of ‘dialectical’ disputes.

I have not tried to argue that the syllogistic is not treated as a logical theory at all in the *Analytics*, for the sections just mentioned do treat it that way. My claim is rather that the syllogistic probably did not develop from ARISTOTLE’S reflections on argument so much as from his early attempts to carry out a Platonic program for mathematizing epistemology. If my view is correct, then the story of ARISTOTLE’S development as a logician may require some revision in other areas. What, for example, is the origin of the doctrine of modality? Did this too perhaps arise as part of a mathematical account of epistemology? Independently of these problems, however, there is an interesting sidelight: if my interpretation of *Prior Analytics* I.4–7 is correct, then this is the oldest surviving complete Greek mathematical work.²¹

Stoic logic, for which the technical term was διαλεκτική, was the logic with by far the greatest public dissemination. Stoic influences on ANDRONICUS are not implausible, and in this area they would be most likely: there simply was no other model available from which to draw a conception of logic. It appears that the *Organon* was ANDRONICUS’ creation; it would not be impossible to suppose that at least some of the compilation and editing of the *Prior* and *Posterior Analytics* is also his work. Indeed, I think the entire matter of the influence of Stoic logic, and Stoic conceptions of logic, on editors and interpreters of ARISTOTLE in antiquity is in need of extensive investigation.

***

²¹ A shorter version of this paper was presented at the Western Division of the American Philosophical Association in April, 1977. I am also indebted to G.N. GEORGACARAKOS of the Department of Philosophy, and ERNEST M. SHULT of the Department of Mathematics of Kansas State University, who provided helpful suggestions. Research for this paper was supported by a grant from Kansas State University.

(Received April 21, 1978)

*Note Added in Proof.* Conversations with JOHN CORCORAN since writing this article have convinced me that I have not dealt at all sufficiently with his position. CORCORAN regards my interpretation of the syllogistic as in some respects equivalent to ŁUKASIEWICZ’S, against which he has argued, and objects to my claim that the syllogistic must deal with relations of statements in order to be regarded as logic. I hope to deal with his views in a subsequent work.