### BOOK EIGHT

### CHAPTER 3

**158a** **31** The same assumptions are hard to attack as are easy to maintain. Such propositions include both those first and those last by nature. For the first propositions require definition, while the final propositions are concluded by means of many steps by anyone wanting to get a continuous argument from the first ones (or **35** otherwise the argumentative attempts appear sophistical: for it is impossible to demonstrate anything without beginning from the appropriate starting-points and connecting up all the way to the last things). Now, answerers neither expect definitions to be given nor, if the questioner does give one, do they pay any attention to it. But **158b** if it has not been made obvious what the subject proposed is, then it is not easy to make the attack. This sort of thing happens mostly with the starting-points. For the other propositions are proved through them, but it is not possible to prove them through others, and we must instead come to know each of them by means of a definition. Those things which are too close to the beginning are **5** also hard to deal with. For it is not possible to come up with many arguments about them since the intermediates between them and the beginning—by means of which the subsequent propositions must be proved—are few in number.

Among definitions, the hardest of all to deal with are those in which words have been used such that, first of all, it is unclear **10** whether they are said simply or in many ways, and on top of that one cannot even tell whether they have been used by the definer literally or metaphorically. For since they are unclear, there are no arguments for attacking them; and since one does not know whether it is because of metaphorical use that they are like this, no **15** criticism is available.

In general, you should assume that whenever a problem is hard to deal with, either it requires a definition, or something is said in many ways or metaphorically, or it is not far from the starting-points—(assume this) because what is not evident to us at first is this very thing: which of the aforementioned ways it is that gives **20** rise to the difficulty. For if it were obvious which way it is, then it would be clear that we must either define, or distinguish, or supply the intermediate premisses (for it is by means of these that the last propositions are proved).

And with many theses, if the definition is not given well, it is not **25** easy to argue and deal with them, e.g. whether one thing is contrary to one, or several. But once ‘contraries’ has been properly defined, it is easy to infer whether it is possible for there to be several contraries for the same thing or not. It is the same way also in other cases requiring definitions.

It also appears that in mathematics, it is not easy to construct **30** proofs of some things because of the deficiency of a definition, for instance that the line cutting a plane figure parallel to its side divides the area and the line similarly. But once the definition has been stated, the proposition is evident at once. For the areas and the lines have the same reciprocal subtraction: and this is the defi- **35** nition of ‘same ratio’.

In a word, the first of the elements are easily proved when the definitions are accepted, e.g. what a line is, what a circle is (although there are not actually many things to deal with about each **159a** of these because the intermediates are not many). But if the definitions of the principles are not accepted, then this is difficult, and in general wellnigh impossible. The situation is also like this in the case of arguments.

We must not forget, then, that when a thesis is difficult to deal with, it has one of the properties mentioned. But when it is a bigger job to argue for the claim (i.e. the premiss) than for the thesis, **5** then one might be puzzled whether such things should be conceded or not. For if you do not concede it but expect <the questioner> to argue for this too, then you will impose a greater task in place of the one initially assigned; but if you do concede it, then you will acquire conviction on the basis of less convincing premisses. So **10** if the problem must not be made more difficult, it should be conceded; but if deduction must be through what is more familiar, it should not be conceded. Or: it should not be conceded by a learner if it is not more familiar, but it should be conceded by someone practising if it only appears true. Consequently, it is evident that a questioner and a teacher should not expect concessions in the same way.