### CHAPTER 9

**103b** **20** Now then, next after this we must distinguish the categories of predications in which the four <types of> predications mentioned are found. These are ten in number: what-it-is, quantity, quality, relation, location, time, position, possession, doing, undergoing. An accident, a genus, a unique property, and a definition will **25** always be in one of these categories, for all the premisses <produced> by means of them signify either a what-it-is, or a quantity, or a quality, or some one of the other categories.

It is clear at once that an <expression> signifying the what-it-is will sometimes signify a substance, sometimes a quantity, sometimes a quality, and sometimes one of the other categories. For, **30** supposing the example under consideration is a man, if it says that the example is a human or an animal, then it says what it is and signifies a substance. On the other hand, supposing the example under consideration is a white colour, if it says that the subject is a white or a colour, then it says what it is and signifies a quality. Similarly, supposing that the example under consideration is a foot-**35**long length, if it says that the example is a foot-long length, then it says what it is and signifies a quantity. And likewise with the other <categories>. For any of these, both in the case in which the same thing is said about itself and in the case in which its genus is said about it, signifies what it is. But when it is said about another <category>, then it does not signify what it is, but how much or what sort or one of the other categories.

These, then, are the number and variety of things arguments are **104a** about and are made from. How we are to obtain them, and the means by which we are to be equipped to deal with them, must be explained next.

### CHAPTER 10

**104a** First, then, it should be determined what a dialectical premiss and a dialectical problem are. For not every premiss or every **5** problem should be counted as dialectical: no one in his right mind would hold out as a premiss what nobody thinks or make a problem of what is evident to everyone or to most people, since the latter contains no puzzle while nobody would concede the former.

A *dialectical premiss* is the asking of something acceptable to **10** everyone, most people, or the wise (that is, either all of them, most of them, or the most famous), provided it is not contrary to opinion (for anyone would concede what the wise think, so long as it is not contrary to the opinions of the many). Dialectical premisses also include: things which are similar to what is acceptable; the **15** contraries of things which appear to be acceptable, put forward by negation; and such opinions as are derived from any established arts.

For if it is acceptable that the knowledge of contraries is the same, then it would also appear to be acceptable that the perception of contraries is the same; and if the skill of reading is numerically one, then the skill of flute-playing is numerically **20** one, while if there are several skills of reading, then there are several skills of flute-playing. For all these seem to be similar and related.

And similarly also whatever is contrary to what is acceptable, put forward as a negation, will appear to be acceptable. For if it is **25** acceptable that one must do good to one’s friends, then it is also acceptable that one must not do them ill. It is contrary that one must do one’s friends ill, but as a negation it is that one must not do them ill. And similarly also, if <it is acceptable that> one must do one’s friends good, then it is also <acceptable that> one must not do one’s enemies good. This is also in accordance with the negations of contraries, for the contrary is that one must do one’s enemies good. Likewise in other cases.

But the contrary applied to the contrary will also appear, in parallel, to be acceptable. For instance, if <it is acceptable **30** that> one must do one’s friends good, then <it will be acceptable that> one must do one’s enemies ill. (Doing one’s friends good might also appear to be contrary to doing one’s enemies ill, but whether this is truly so or not will be explained in what we say about contraries.)

It is also clear that such opinions as are derived from arts are **35** dialectical premisses. For anyone would concede what those who have examined these subjects think, e.g. what a doctor thinks about medical questions, or what a geometer thinks about geometrical questions, and likewise in other cases.

### CHAPTER 11

**104b** A *dialectical problem* is a point of speculation, directed either to choice and avoidance or to truth and knowledge (either on its own or as working in conjunction with something else of this sort), about which people either have no opinion, or the public think the **5** opposite of the wise, or the wise think the opposite of the public, or each of these groups has opposed opinions within itself.

For it is useful to know <the answers to> some problems only for the sake of choosing or avoiding something (for instance whether pleasure is to be chosen or not), while it is useful to know others only for the sake of knowing (for instance whether the universe is eternal or not). Others are, in and of themselves, of no use for **10** either of these but work in conjunction with other things of this sort. For there are many things which we do not wish to know in and of themselves, but for the sake of other things, in such wise that, because of them, we will come to know something further.

Those are also <dialectical> problems concerning which there are contrary deductions (for there is a puzzle whether it is so or not, because there are persuasive arguments about both sides), as well **15** as those about which, because they are vast, we have no arguments, thinking that it is difficult to give the reason why (e.g. whether the universe is eternal or not). For one could also pursue an inquiry about such problems.

Let problems and premisses, then, be defined as has been said. A **20** *thesis* is: a belief contrary to opinion held by someone famous for philosophy, e.g. that contradiction is impossible (as Antisthenes used to say), or that everything moves (according to Heraclitus), or that what is is one (as Melissus says). (For to take things contrary to our opinions seriously when just any person declares them is silly.) Or: something about which we possess an argument contrary to our **25** opinions, e.g. that not everything that is either has come to be or is eternal, as the sophists say of the musician who is literate without either having become so or always being so (for even someone who does not think this might <come to> think it because there is an argument).

A thesis, then, is also a problem, but not every problem is a **30** thesis, since some problems are the sort of thing about which we think nothing either way. But that a thesis is a problem is clear. For it is necessary from what has been said either that the public disagrees with the wise about the position, or that one or the other group disagrees among themselves, since a thesis is some belief **35** contrary to opinion. In practice, all dialectical problems are probably called theses. But let it make no difference whatever it is called. For it is not because we want to coin terms that we have distinguished them in this way, but so that we should not overlook **105a** whatever differences there actually are among them.

One ought not to inquire into every problem or every thesis, but only those which someone might be puzzled about who was in need of arguments, not punishment or perception. For those who **5** puzzle about whether one must honour the gods and care for one’s parents or not need punishment, while those who puzzle about whether snow is white or not need perception. Nor ought one to inquire into that the demonstration of which is near to hand, or those the demonstration of which is excessively remote. For the former present no difficulty, while the latter present too much for exercises.


### CHAPTER 9

**103b20.** This section introduces one of the most famous of Aristotelian doctrines, that of the *categories*. In fact, the word *katēgoria* simply means ‘predication’, and Aristotle says here that he is distinguishing ‘kinds (or genera) of predications’ (*ta genē tōn katēgoriōn*). Almost immediately, however, these become simply ‘the predications’. We find him using this sort of shorthand elsewhere, e.g. ‘the problems’ in the *Prior Analytics* for ‘the kinds of problem’ (i.e. the types of statement), ‘the causes’ for ‘the kinds of cause’. This is nicely reflected in the phrase ‘the four predications mentioned’: the kinds of predication in which the aforementioned four predications (the predicables, or expressions thereof) are found. Having said that, I have retained the traditional ‘category’ for *katēgoria* (but note that, as we should expect from the origins of the shorthand, the word is always plural here).

The expression ‘categories of predications’ may seem to imply that the categories are themselves classes of predicates. However, they may be given two other interpretations. First, different types of predicate may be related to the subjects of which they are predicated in different ways. Second, different types of predicate may correspond to different types of entity. In fact, all three interpretations may be involved in the uses to which Aristotle puts the categories elsewhere. We find the categories as types of predicate-subject relation in *An. Post.* I. 22 (and cf. below, 103b36–9); they are clearly types of entity, with corresponding senses of ‘is’, in the *Metaphysics* (B 3, $\Delta$ 7, E 2, Z 1), where each category is linked to a different sense of ‘exists’.

I have for the most part retained the traditional names of the categories. Literally, they are ‘what it is’ (*ti esti*) ‘how much’ (*poson*), ‘what sort’ (*poion*), ‘in relation to something’ (*pros ti*), ‘where’ (*pou*), ‘when’ (*pote*), ‘to be situated’ (*keisthai*), ‘to have’ (*echein*), ‘to do’ (*poiein*), ‘to undergo’ (*paschein*). However, it is clear that these are already technical uses for Aristotle, since he uses them elsewhere in the *Topics* as, in effect, indeclinable nouns or adjectives. No gain in clarity would result from literalness.

The first category is an exception. Aristotle identifies this as ‘what it is’, but soon varies this with ‘substance’ (*ousia*), his preferred term for this category elsewhere. Interpreters also differ on the correct rendering of this term, which is derived from the verb ‘be’ (*on-* + *sia* = ‘being-ness’) and in everyday Greek can mean simply ‘wealth’ or ‘possessions’. Something like ‘entity’ (Owens’s rendering) is probably close to the mark: I choose ‘substance’ on the authority of tradition. The translation of *ti esti* is more problematic: ‘essence’ is favoured by tradition, but modern philosophical usage of this term is so variable that this is not likely to help. The unnatural look of my rendering, ‘what-it-is’ with hyphens, is intended to remind us that this is a technical locution for Aristotle.

Aristotle presents the categories as arising out of classifications of the answers to questions about something—evidently, about anything whatsoever. Ackrill (1963, 78–9) notes that we can imagine two different series of such questions. First, we may ask about something (e.g. Socrates), ‘What is it?’ When we get an answer (e.g. ‘A man’), we repeat this question about that, getting another answer (e.g. ‘An animal’). At each step, we obtain a higher genus; the process continues until we reach the highest genus possible, which will be a *category* (in the example, ‘substance’). Alternatively, we may classify the different kinds of question we can ask about a single thing: ‘What is it?’ ‘Of what sort is it?’ ‘Where is it?’ Answers appropriate to one of these questions will generally make no sense in response to another. The categories will then emerge from these classifications of answers.

As Ackrill notes, the first series of questions leads to a classification of *subjects*, while the second leads to a classification of *predicates*. Although the results of the two series are (as Ackrill says) equivalent, they nevertheless reflect the ambiguity of interpretation of the categories noted above (the second series could also be seen as leading to a classification of predications as well as of predicates).

Aristotle gives lists of categories elsewhere, though only the *Categories* (4, 1b25–7) repeats the ten given here: elsewhere we find shorter lists of eight (*Phys.* V. 1, 115b5, *Met.* K 12, 1068a8, *An. Post.* I. 22, 83a21, b16), six (*Met.* E 4, 1029b4, *Phys.* I. 7, 190a34, *EN* I. 6, 1096a23, *EE* I. 8, 1217b28), five (*Met.* E 2, 1026a36, *Rhet.* II. 7, 1385b5), or even four (*GC* I. 3, 317b9, *Met.* Z 7, 1032a15). In general, the *Categories* most closely resembles the *Topics* in its account. One similarity is that neither treatise makes any kind of attempt to defend the list of ten categories (on this score, *Categories* 4 is even sparer than *Top.* I. 9).

**103b29.** ‘the example under consideration’: *to ekkeimenon*, literally ‘what is set out’. Some translators take this rather vividly, so that Aristotle is imagining someone in the presence of a concrete individual (in the first case, some individual human being) ‘set out’ for some kind of consideration. The verbs *ekkeisthai* and *ektithenai* are sometimes associated in Aristotle with argumentative procedures in which an individual is singled out for consideration (see e.g. *An. Pr.* I. 41, 49b33–50a4), but this need not refer to actual contemplation of a concrete individual.

**103b36–9.** ‘said about itself’: Aristotle has previously given definitions and genera as the two types of predicates which ‘say what it is’ about their subjects. Since he explicitly mentions the genus as the second alternative, we would expect this first one to refer to predicating a thing’s *definition* of it. However, it would be odd to call that ‘saying it of itself’, and the examples he gives do not seem to include definitions. If we take those examples to be predications with a concrete individual as subject, ‘said of itself’ is again odd, since a concrete individual cannot serve as a predicate. And predicating its *species* of a concrete individual, e.g. saying ‘That is human’ or ‘That is white’ of something indicated by ostension, also hardly qualifies as something ‘said about itself’. (This is another reason for translating *to ekkeimenon* as I do above.)

It is better to see Aristotle as distinguishing between absolute and relative senses of ‘what-it-is’. Substantial predicates like ‘man’ and ‘horse’ signify a what-it-is in the absolute sense. However, every predicate, whether substantial or not, can be defined, and the definition of a predicate says what it is in the relative sense. Generalizing, Aristotle says: predicating any species of itself, or any genus of one of its species, counts as ‘saying what it is’ in the relative sense, regardless of the category of the predicate. However, in predications that cross categorial lines, the category of the predicate also indicates the relation of predicate to subject. This distinction is important to Aristotle elsewhere, e.g. *An. Post.* I. 22.


### CHAPTER 10

**104a3–8.** This passage gives an especially clear picture of the real meanings of ‘premiss’ and ‘problem’: the words get their force from their cognate verbs *proteinein*, *proballein*, which designate types of argumentative procedures (cf. Note on 101b28–36). I have tried to bring this out with redundant translations of the verbs: *proteineie* as ‘hold out as a premiss’, *probaloi* as ‘make a problem’. ‘What nobody thinks’ (*to mēdeni dokoun*) recalls the link between *endoxa* and what people think. ‘Contains no puzzle’ (*ouk echei aporian*) recalls Aristotle’s emphasis on ‘working through the puzzles’ (*diaporein*) as the first stage of a scientific inquiry.

Premisses and problems are distinguished by their argumentative functions. When Aristotle says that not every premiss or problem is dialectical, we should ask what the non-dialectical ones look like. To judge by what he says here, non-dialectical premisses would at least include statements which have no support from any quarter, while non-dialectical problems at least include whatever has never been called into question by anyone. I. 1 implies that scientific principles are also non-dialectical, and the same would presumably hold for the conclusions of scientific demonstrations. However, many scientific principles might also appear to be the case to one of the relevant groups; many demonstrable propositions will also be denied by those lacking the relevant science. Elsewhere, Aristotle says that the many and the wise often have exactly opposed sentiments about what is obvious and what is puzzling (see e.g. *Met.* A 1–2). Hence controversial scientific principles and conclusions should qualify as dialectical.

**104a8–12.** ‘the asking of something acceptable’ (*erōtēsis endoxos*): that is, putting an acceptable proposition forward as a question. Note that this again emphasizes that a dialectical premiss is a kind of question asked: cf. *An. Pr.* I. 1, 24a24–6, 24b10–12.

104a9–10 exactly parallels 100b21–3 except that the word *endoxon* now replaces ‘what seems so’ (*ta dokounta*). This indicates that even in the earlier passage, Aristotle is not defining *endoxa* but instead specifying the different types of *endoxa*. The conclusion is that the term *endoxon* really is a relative term: to be acceptable is to be acceptable *to someone*. If we keep this in mind, a number of puzzles disappear.

‘contrary to opinion’ (*paradoxos*): ‘paradoxical’ is too narrow. What Aristotle says is only that one cannot use an opinion of ‘the wise’ as a dialectical premiss if it is *contrary* to what most people think: the view need not be ‘paradoxical’ in a stronger sense, e.g. supported by a paradoxical argument. This would imply that the opinions of the wise might be used as dialectical premisses under two circumstances: if they agree with the opinions of the many, or if there simply is nothing about the subject in question which counts as the opinion of the many. Note that this must only apply to the opinions of the wise, since it would be otiose to say that what all or most people think is ‘not contrary to opinion’.

**104a12–15.** Aristotle follows his definition by listing three further classes of acceptable premiss. The first two classes depend on logical transformations which, when applied to acceptable premisses, yield other premisses that are (or at least ‘appear to be’) acceptable; the third class amounts to ‘expert opinions’.

**104a15–20.** First transformation: if some term in an acceptable premiss is replaced by a similar term, the result is also acceptable. Aristotle’s examples make the point clear enough. However, he does not explain just what use is to be made of such transformations. In fact, the *inference* from one such premiss to another here recalls a type of move often found in Plato’s dialogues, that is, reasoning from one case to another similar one. Aristotle may therefore be proposing a general strategy for obtaining premisses: in order to obtain $p$ from an opponent, try first to obtain some premiss derived from $p$ by replacing some term with a similar one.

**104a20–30.** To understand Aristotle’s second group of transformations, we must look ahead to II. 7, which uses very similar examples in discussing another question. Suppose that we have a compound term containing two terms A and B, each of which has a contrary. As an example, consider the compound ‘doing good to one’s friends’: its components ‘doing good’ and ‘one’s friends’ have as contraries ‘doing ill’ and ‘one’s enemies’. We can form various other expressions by substituting the contrary of A, or the contrary of B, or both, in the original expression. Which of these are contrary to which? Aristotle’s answer in II. 7 is that if we replace *one* term in a complex with its contrary, the new complex is contrary to the old, but that if we replace *both* terms the new complex is not contrary. For instance, ‘doing good to one’s enemies’ and ‘doing ill to one’s friends’ are both contrary to ‘doing good to one’s friends’, but ‘doing ill to one’s enemies’ is not.

Now the simplest way to describe the rule on which he is relying would be something like this: if a premiss is acceptable, then the premiss we get by replacing one term in it with its contrary and negating the result is also acceptable. This is in accordance with the results of II. 7: when one term in a complex is replaced with its contrary, the resulting complex is contrary to the original. The phrase ‘put forward as a negation’ recalls the dialectical context, in which premisses are questions: the transformed premiss will get an affirmative answer if we pose it in the manner of a negation.

(Two complications should be mentioned in passing. First, is Aristotle thinking of relations of contrariety between terms or between propositions? He is sensitive to this point elsewere, e.g. *De Int.* 7; however, it is difficult to find evidence of it in the present passage. Second, in Greek, as well as in English, ‘must not’ is not the negation of ‘must’: the negation of ‘One must do good to one’s friends’ is ‘One *need not* do good to one’s friends’. Aristotle’s translators and commentators have generally missed this point as much as Aristotle; I shall ignore it.)

**104a28–33.** Now Aristotle turns to the other case considered in II. 7: replacing two terms in a complex with their contraries. II. 7 says that this transformation does not produce contraries. Therefore, the new premiss will not be contrary to the old premiss, and we cannot expect it to be acceptable when put forward as a negation. But Aristotle goes beyond this to say that the two-term transformation *itself* will be acceptable. He may be relying on a rule similar to that stated in II. 8, 113b27–34 (see Excerpt A): if A goes with B, then the contrary of A goes with the contrary of B.

The phrase ‘in parallel’ (*en parabolēi*) has vexed interpreters, but it seems most natural to take it as contrasted with ‘as a negation’: what distinguishes the present case from those before is just that the premiss obtained from the transformation is *not* negated and is thus ‘parallel’ to the original.

**104a30–3.** ‘What we say about contraries’ probably refers to II. 7, where Aristotle argues at some length that A + B and Contrary(A) + Contrary(B) are not contraries, using the very terms found here (113a1–8); this suggests that some of his contemporaries were inclined to think otherwise.

**104a33–7.** Since doctors and geometers are ‘the wise’ when it comes to medicine and geometry respectively, it would seem that their opinions on their areas of expertise automatically qualify as *endoxa*. But if we suppose, as I have, that there are many lists of *endoxa* for different types of interlocutor, Aristotle may be making the different point that expert opinion can *always* be used as a source of dialectical premisses: *anyone* would concede what the relevant experts think.

### CHAPTER 11

**104b1–5.** Aristotle has already explained what a problem is, to wit, some proposition considered as a subject for debate. He now explains which problems count as *dialectical*. An earlier remark in I. 10 (**104a6–7**) implies that in order to be dialectical, a problem must be susceptible of real disagreement. The second part of Aristotle’s definition reflects this: a dialectical problem is something about which people hold either conflict-ing opinions or no opinion. The term ‘point of speculation’ (*theōrēma*) is derived from the verb *theōrein*, Aristotle’s usual designation for the activ-ity of pure intellectual inquiry. However, in wider Greek usage a *theōrēma* could be anything intended to be beheld or looked at (such as a theatrical spectacle). Aristotle himself uses the term in application to the ‘phantasm’ or mental representation which he thinks is necessarily involved in sense perception.

A dialectical problem, then, is by definition a subject about which people can disagree. But Aristotle’s definition also includes a specification of subject-matter: ‘choice and avoidance’ or ‘truth and knowledge’. If we take this as a limitation, then any problem not concerned with either of these will fail to be dialectical. However, it is difficult to imagine an example of such a problem: it would need to be a subject about which genuine disa-greement is possible but which is concerned neither with practical choices nor with theoretical understanding. The specification of subject-matter is better understood as a very general classification of problems, derived from observation of the subjects of actual dialectical exchanges (see the comments on the following lines and on **105b19–29**).

**104b5–12.** The threefold division of problems is often taken to corre-spond to the division of premisses and problems into ‘ethical’, ‘scientific’, and ‘logical’ at **105b19–29**. This identification is given some support by the use of the example ‘whether the universe is eternal’ in both passages but it is hardly certain. In any event, Aristotle is not stipulating what counts as a subject of dialectical discussion but rather classifying the actual subjects encountered in dialectical exchanges. To use terminology common in his own later works, some of these problems are *practical*—concerned with deliberation and action—while others are *theoretical*, i.e. concerned with knowledge only. In fact, the way in which he makes the distinction later in the chapter is very much in accordance with the treatment of ‘theoretical wisdom’ (*sophia*) and ‘practical wisdom’ (*phronēsis*), the two principal intellectual virtues, in *EN* VI. However, the present distinction is not explicitly correlated with that pair (see the Commentary on **105b19–29** for further discussion.)

**104b6.** ‘know the answers to some problems’: literally, just ‘know some problems’ (*enia eidenai*). But the standard expression of a problem is with a ‘whether’ clause, and thus the problem itself fits exactly (in Greek as in English) as a direct object of ‘know’: ‘to know whether $p$’. I have supplied ‘answers’ to make this sense clear.

**104b12–17.** The essential characteristic of a dialectical problem is that it is something which can be meaningfully debated. Although Aristotle initially defines a dialectical problem in **104b1–5** as something about which there is actual disagreement, he now observes that debate may be possible in two further cases even if divergence of opinion does not exist. In a sense, his two cases are opposite extremes. First, it may be the case that there are *arguments* for and against a given view (regardless of whether there is a real difference of opinion about it). In such a case, the arguments them-selves make debate possible (as examples, we might think of almost any philosophical issue). Second, the question may be so ‘vast’ that we simply do not know what to say: we have *no* arguments. Either of these types of question, says Aristotle, might give rise to an inquiry, and thus both are dialectical.

The term ‘puzzle’ has a special significance in Aristotle’s usage. He approaches philosophical questions with the assumption that human knowledge itself progresses in a manner similar to a dialectical discussion: understanding increases by first recognizing the ‘puzzles’ that exist con-cerning a subject and then discovering solutions to them. According to *Met.* A, philosophy—theoretical inquiry—always begins in ‘wonder’ (*thaumazein*), that is, the recognition that a certain state of affairs is in need of explanation. The goal of philosophy is then to find this explanation and thereby dispel the wonder or puzzlement. Aristotle normally begins his discussions of subjects by first laying out all the puzzles that have been raised concerning them, a procedure he designates with the verb *diaporein*.

A much-discussed passage in the *Nicomachean Ethics* (VII. 1, 1145b1–7) says that any inquiry should begin with the ‘appearances’ (*phainomena*) and, by a process of working through the puzzles, try to ‘solve’ these puzzles while retaining the greatest number possible of the *endoxa* concerning the subject-matter. G. E. L. Owen (1961) proposed that the ‘appearances’ include not only observations of natural phenomena but also opinions held by the general public or by other philosophers—in other words, things that are *endoxa*, according to the *Topics*. We could take this to mean only that the fact of general acceptance is a prima facie reason for supposing that an opinion is true, so that we should at least take any such opinion seriously. However, the closing words of the *Nicomachean Ethics* passage hint at something stronger: ‘for if the difficul-ties are solved and the *endoxa* remain, that would be proof enough’. On this basis, some have concluded that some kind of dialectical justification is constitutive of truth for the first principles (see Nussbaum 1986, Irwin 1988). I do not find such arguments persuasive (see Hamlyn 1990 for criticism of Nussbaum and Irwin); in any event, no such view need be read into the *Topics*.

**104b18–28.** A ‘thesis’ or ‘position’ (*thesis*), as defined here, is a startling or incredible view that is taken seriously only because some famous person has maintained it, or because some argument can be advanced for it. Note that these will correspond to the views ‘contrary to opinion’ disqualified as dialectical premisses at **104a10–12**. The tone of the discussion again shows that Aristotle is not introducing a new term but instead fitting established terminology into his own framework. Evidently, ‘problem’ and ‘thesis’ were both current in dialectic, probably without being sharply distin-guished from one another. Aristotle proposes a distinction according to which a thesis is a kind of problem; argues for it; and then tries to mollify any offence the argument might offer by saying that names do not really matter so long as we understand the underlying distinctions they are meant to capture.

Since *thesis* is connected with *tithenai*, the verb that indicates the accept-ance of a premiss, it is a surprise to find ‘thesis’ defined here as quite the opposite of something ‘acceptable’. However, what makes something a *thesis* in the sense of **104b19ff.** is principally its acceptance by *someone famous*. Thus, Aristotle’s qualification at **104b22–4** is intended to make it clear that not just anyone’s acceptance of a proposition makes it a thesis. Compare Alexander on **105b10**: ‘he used the word “thesis” here because of agreeing, i.e. supposing [*tithesthai*]’ (91. 12–13).

**104b26–7.** ‘the musician who is literate’: the point Aristotle is making is easier to see than the example with which he makes it. His intent is merely to illustrate the second class of theses, those supported by argument. The conclusion of the argument is clear: ‘not everything which is either has come to be or is eternal’. No one would be inclined to take such a thesis seriously but for the fact that an argument can be constructed in its sup-port. Moreover, since Aristotle characterizes the propounders of the argu-ment in question as sophists, he intends to include as theses of this sort any paradox in the usual sense of the term.

The argument he has in mind is almost certainly the one which appears in fuller form in *Met.* E 2, 1026b18–20, and K 8, 1064b23–6. One possible reconstruction is as follows: Suppose that X, who is literate but not musi-cal, becomes musical. After this has happened, we can say ‘X the musician is literate’. However, it does not appear that X the musician *became* literate: there was a time when there was no such thing as X the literate musician (i.e. the time at which X was not a musician), but there is never a time at which X the musician changed from being illiterate to being literate. Other reconstructions are possible. The word translated ‘musical’ may also mean ‘cultured’ or ‘educated’, so that it presupposes literacy (the ability to read and write). In that case, it would be impossible for anyone ‘musical’ to become literate, since ‘musicality’ in that sense presupposes literacy: ‘X the cultured becomes literate’ cannot ever be true. But as Brunschwig (1986) notes, the form of the argument in *Met.* K seems incon-sistent with this interpretation. However it is to be interpreted, the argu-ment is smoother in Greek, where nouns and adjectives are more parallel in syntax than in English: *ho mousikos* and *ho grammatikos* (‘the musical one’, ‘the literate one’) behave like *ho anthrōpos* (‘the man’). See Brunschwig (1986: 128–9), Kirwan (1973: 191–2) for further discussion.

**104b29–105a2.** This section also shows that ‘thesis’ is not Aristotle’s coin-age but had an accepted technical use in dialectic as he knew it. The sense seems to be that in dialectical exchanges (exercises?), the proposition under discussion is always referred to as a thesis, even if it is not a contro-versial opinion of a famous philosopher. As in other cases, Aristotle tries to provide a rational basis for an existing terminology.

**105a3–7.** Perception and punishment can be associated respectively with theoretical science and ethics. Aristotle holds that a good upbringing is a necessary condition for understanding philosophical ethics: moral judge-ments rest ultimately on dispositions formed in childhood through habitu-ation, and habituation results from rewards and punishments. Those who have the wrong dispositions are in need of punishment, not argument, to correct them. In the sphere of science, Aristotle holds that perception is ultimately the basis of knowledge: he is frequently distrustful of attempts (Platonic or otherwise) to construct scientific theories a priori, and he rejects Plato’s view that learning is a kind of remembering.

These lines, then, imply that dialectical argument is pursued in an at-tempt to resolve questions: Aristotle’s point is that it cannot make the wicked good nor the blind see. Does he then mean that certain questions, for instance the examples he gives here, cannot be the subjects of dialecti-cal argument? I think he is instead concerned with the limits of what argument can accomplish. He has already allowed that dialectical theses may include paradoxical assertions supported either by famous authority or by argument, and we have plenty of examples of these from Aristotle’s time that fly in the face of accepted morality and common sense. Aristotle is not claiming that these cannot be debated dialectically. However, there is a difference between debating them for the sake of argument and debating them ‘for real’. Arguing with the depraved is a waste of time, if our goal is to change their behaviour; arguing about what can be decided through perception, if we need that decision for practical purposes, is silly.

**105a7–9.** The ‘demonstrations’ Aristotle refers to here are presumably arguments which establish one or the other side of a problem. Aristotle’s contrast between ‘near’ and ‘remote’ demonstrations probably does not refer so much to the intrinsic difficulty of the problems (earlier, he in-cluded ‘vast’ questions as dialectical) as to the length of the arguments themselves. A very short argument is too obvious to engage anyone’s attention; a lengthy argument in the style of a mathematical demonstration could hardly be developed or discovered in a verbal exchange. ‘Too much for exercises’ should not be taken to imply that *all* dialectical arguments are exercises (see I. 2 and Commentary). Aristotle never suggests that dialectical arguments are a means for discovering demonstrations, though they may have a role in developing the argumentative skills required for demonstration and also in discovering the *principles* of demonstrations. A truly difficult demonstration is likely to be discovered only by a solitary thinker; trying to come up with it during an argumentative exchange is bound to be a waste of time.

