### CHAPTER 14

**163a** **29** For the sake of exercise and practice in such arguments, you should **30** first become accustomed to converting arguments. For in this way we shall be better able to deal with whatever is said, and also in learning a few arguments we shall learn many. Now, to convert is to reject one of the premisses given by taking the reverse of the conclusion along with the other premisses asked. For it is neces- **35** sary, if the conclusion is not so, for some one of the premisses to be rejected, since it was necessary for the conclusion to be so when they were all conceded.

And for every thesis, investigate the means of attack both for showing that it is so and for showing that it is not so; and as soon as **163b** you have found one, at once look for its solution. For in this way, one will simultaneously get exercise both for asking and for answering; and even if we do not have anyone to practice with, we can do this on our own. Also, select the lines of attack concerning the **5** same thesis and set them out alongside each other. For it makes one very adept at giving compelling arguments, and in addition provides a great support in refuting, when one is readily equipped to argue both that it is so and that it is not so (for in consequence <one’s opponent> must be on guard against arguments from con-trary directions). And also, when it comes to knowledge and the wisdom that comes from philosophy, being able to discern—or **10** already having discerned—the consequences of either assumption is no small instrument: for it remains to choose one or the other of these rightly. In order to do that, one must be naturally gifted, and this is what it is to be naturally gifted with respect to truth: to be able properly to choose the true and avoid the false. This is just **15** what the naturally good are able to do, for it is by loving and hating in the right way whatever is presented to them that they judge well what is best.

For those problems which arise most often to deal with, you should learn arguments by heart (and especially about the first theses: for in the case of these, answerers often give up in despair). **20** Next, you should be ready with definitions and have both accept-able and primary premisses at your fingertips, for it is through these that deductions come about. You should also try to master those <problems> under which other arguments most often fall. For just as in geometry it is useful to have gone through exercises with the **25** elements, or as in arithmetic having the multiplication table at your fingertips makes a great difference when figuring a multiple of some other number, so too in the case of arguments are having things at your fingertips when it comes to the starting-points and learning premisses until they are on the tip of your tongue. For just **30** as in the art of remembering, the mere mention of the places instantly makes us recall the things, so these will make us more apt at deductions through looking to these defined premisses in order of enumeration. And it is a common premiss rather than an argu-ment which should be committed to memory, for being ready with a starting-point—that is, assumption—is a matter of manageable difficulty.

Next, get accustomed to making one argument into many, like **35** people who are concealing with the greatest of obscurity: an argu-ment would be of that sort if someone stands off as far as possible from things of the same kind as what the argument is about. Those will be powerful arguments that can undergo this to the most universal degree, e.g. that there is not a single science of several **164a** things: for so stated, it will apply to relatives, contraries, or co-ordinates.

You should make your memorized accounts of arguments uni-versal, even if they were argued as particulars. For in this way, it **5** will also be possible to make the one argument into many. (The same also holds in the case of rhetoric for enthymemes.) But you should for your part avoid as much as possible letting arguments tend towards a universal. And you should always examine argu-ments to see whether they are arguing about common things. For all arguments that argue to a particular conclusion also argue uni- **10** versally, and the demonstration of a universal is present in the particular deduction because it is not possible to deduce anything without universals.

Exercise with those apt at induction should be assigned to a beginner; exercise with those apt at deduction to someone experi-enced. And try to take premisses from those apt at deduction, **15** examples from those apt at induction. For it is in this that each has been exercised. In general, try to bring away from any argu-mentative exercise session either a deduction about something, or a solution, or an objection, or whether someone said something correctly or incorrectly (whether yourself or someone else), and **164b** the reason why in either case: for these are what the ability comes from, and exercising is for the sake of ability. This especially con-cerns premisses and objections. For, in a word, the dialectical per-son is the one who can put forward and object. Putting forward **5** propositions is making many things into one (for in general that one thing must be obtained to which the argument is directed), while objecting is making one thing many (for he either divides or rejects, granting one of the things put forward but not another).

You should not argue with everybody or practise with just any-one you happen to encounter. For with some people, arguments **10** necessarily become bad. For against someone who tries at all costs to make it appear that he is escaping, it is right to try at all costs to deduce, but it is not seemly. This is why you should not lightly enter into contests with just anyone you meet: the level of argument is bound to degenerate, for even people engaged in exercises are **15** unable to resist arguing contentiously.

You should also have arguments already made up for the sorts of problem concerning which, being ready with the smallest number of arguments, we will have those useful for the greatest number (these are the universal arguments). And in addition, <have already made up> those it is too difficult to come up with out of what is available on the spot.