### CHAPTERS 4 AND 5

**159a** **15** So, as for the way we ought to devise questions and arrange them, these remarks are probably enough. But about answering, first we should determine what is the task of the good answerer, as well as the good questioner. Now, the job of the questioner is to lead the argument so as to make the answerer state the most **20** unacceptable of the consequences made necessary as a result of the thesis, while the job of the answerer is to make it appear that it is not because of him that anything impossible or contrary to opinion results, but because of the thesis (for conceding at first what one should not is probably a different mistake from failing to defend **25** that concession properly). [VIII. 5] But since these points are not defined for those who engage in arguments for the sake of exercise and testing—for the goals are not the same for teachers and learners as for competitors, nor for the latter and for those who engage with one another for the sake of inquiry. For the learner must **30** always concede the opinions—and nobody tries to teach a falsehood—but among competitors, the questioner must at all costs appear to be inflicting something on the answerer, while the answerer must appear not to be affected. But when it comes to dialectical meetings among people who engage in arguments not for the sake of competition, but for testing and inquiry, it has never been spelt out what the answerer must aim at, or what sorts of **35** things he must grant and what not in order to <count as> defending his thesis well or not.—To get back to the point, since nothing has been transmitted to us about these things, let us try to say something ourselves.

Now, the answerer must necessarily take up the argument by agreeing to a thesis that is either acceptable, or unacceptable, or **159b** neither; and one that is acceptable or unacceptable either without qualification or in a definite way (as to a specific person, to himself, or to someone else). But it makes no difference in what way the thesis is acceptable or unacceptable: for there will be the same way of answering well, of granting or not granting what is asked. If the **5** thesis is unacceptable, then, the conclusion must become acceptable, and if acceptable unacceptable (for the questioner always concludes the opposite of the thesis). And if what is supposed is neither unacceptable nor acceptable, then the conclusion will also be of that sort. Since whoever deduces well deduces the problem assigned from more acceptable and more familiar things, it is evi- **10** dent that if the thing supposed is unacceptable without qualification, then the answerer should grant neither what does not seem so without qualification, nor what seems so but less than the conclusion. For if the thesis is unacceptable, the conclusion is acceptable; consequently, all the premisses obtained must be acceptable, and more acceptable than the conclusion proposed, if it is through things more familiar that the less familiar is to be concluded. Thus, **15** if one of the premisses asked is not of this sort, the answerer should not concede it. But if the thesis is acceptable without qualification, then it is clear that the conclusion is unacceptable without qualification. He should therefore concede both everything that seems so and anything which does not but is less unacceptable than the conclusion (for it would appear to have been sufficiently argued). **20** Similarly if the thesis is neither acceptable nor unacceptable. For in this case also he should grant both everything apparent and whatever does not seem so but is more acceptable than the conclusion: for in this way it will turn out that the arguments are more acceptable.

Now if what is proposed is acceptable or unacceptable without qualification, then it is with respect to what seems so without **25** qualification that he should make the comparison. But if what is proposed is acceptable or unacceptable, not without qualification, but to the answerer, then it is with respect to what he himself thinks or does not think that he should judge what to concede or not concede. And if the answerer is defending someone else’s opinion, then clearly it is with an eye to that person’s thought that he must **30** concede or refuse anything. This is also why those who are defending the opinions of others—for instance that good and bad are the same thing, according to what Heraclitus says—refuse to grant that contraries cannot be present simultaneously in the same thing: it is not because they do not think this themselves, but because according to Heraclitus this is what you must say. This is also what those **35** who take over theses from each other do, for they aim at what the one who advanced the thesis would say.