### CHAPTER 4

**101b** **11** First, then, we must consider what our method consists of. Now, if we understood the number and kinds of things that arguments are about, what they are made of, and how we are to be equipped to deal with these, then we would have a sufficient grasp of our proposed subject. But the things arguments are made of are equal in number to, and the same as, the things which deductions are **15** about. For arguments are made from premisses, while the things deductions concern are problems: and every premiss, as well as every problem, exhibits either a *unique property*, a *genus* or an *accident* (the differentia, since it is genus-like, should be classified together with the genus).

But since one sort of unique property signifies what it is to be **20** something and another sort does not, let us divide unique properties into both the parts stated, and let us call the sort that signifies what it is to be something a *definition*, while the remaining sort may be referred to as a *unique property*, in accordance with the common designation given to them. Clearly, then, from what has been said, it turns out that according to the present division they are four in all: either definition, unique property, genus, or accident. No one **25** should take us to mean that each one of these, uttered by itself, is a premiss or a problem, but instead that it is out of these that both premisses and problems arise.

A problem is different from a premiss in its form. For stated in **30** this way: ‘Is it the case that two-footed terrestrial animal is the definition of man?’ or, ‘Is it the case that animal is the genus of man?’ it is a premiss; but stated in this way: ‘Whether two-footed terrestrial animal is the definition of man or not’, it becomes a **35** problem (and similarly in other cases). Consequently, it stands to reason that problems and premisses are equal in number, since you may make a problem out of any premiss by changing its form.

### CHAPTER 5

**101b** **38** We must say what a definition is, what a unique property is, what a genus is, and what an accident is. A *definition* is a phrase which **102a** signifies the what-it-is-to-be. It is given either as a phrase in place of a word or as a phrase in place of a phrase (for it is also possible to define something signified by a phrase). But as for those who answer with a word (however they do so), it is clear that these **5** people are not giving the definition of the subject, since every definition is a phrase. We should, however, class as definitory something like ‘the beautiful is the fitting’, and similarly the question whether perception and knowledge are the same or different. For indeed, in connection with definitions, the better part of our time is **10** taken up with whether things are the same or different. To put it simply, let us call all those things definitory which fall under the same method as definitions. And that all the cases just mentioned are of this sort is evident at once. For if we are able to argue that things are the same or that they are different, then we shall also be well provided for attacking definitions in the same way (for in showing that they are not the same we shall also have refuted the **15** definition). But this last statement does not convert: to establish a definition, it is not sufficient to show that they are the same. However, in order to refute one, it is enough of itself to show that they are not the same.

A *unique property* is what does not exhibit what it is to be for some subject but belongs only to it and counterpredicates with it. **20** For example, it is a unique property of a human to be capable of becoming literate: for if something is human, then it is capable of becoming literate, and if it is capable of becoming literate, then it is human. For no one would call something unique which is capable of belonging to something else (as for instance being asleep for a human), not even if it happened for a time to belong to one thing **25** alone. Therefore, if something of this sort were to be called a unique property, it will not be so called without qualification, but rather unique at a time or in relation to something: being on the right is unique at a time, and two-footed is really called unique in relation to something (for instance, of a human in relation to a **30** horse or a dog). But it is clear that nothing which can possibly belong to something else counterpredicates: for it is not necessary for something to be human if it is asleep.

A *genus* is what is predicated in the what-it-is of many things which are different in species. (Let us say that those sorts of things are ‘predicated in the what-it-is’ which it would be appropriate to give as answers when asked what the thing in question is, as it is appropriate in the case of a man, when asked what it is, to say that **35** it is an animal.) The question whether one thing is in the same genus as another, or in a different one, is also genus-like, since this sort of thing also falls under the same method as a genus: for if we have argued that animal is the genus of man, and also of the ox, then we shall have argued that they are in the same genus, while if **102b** we show that it is the genus of one and that it is not the genus of the other then we shall have argued that they are not in the same genus.

An *accident* is something which is none of these—not a defini- **5** tion, a unique property, or a genus—but yet belongs to the subject; or, what can possibly belong and not belong to one and the same thing, whatever it may be. For instance, it is possible for ‘being seated’ to belong and not belong to the same thing. Similarly, also, for ‘white’, for nothing prevents the same thing from being now **10** white, now not white. The second of these definitions of ‘accident’ is better. For when the first definition is stated, anyone who is going to understand it must already know what a definition, a unique property, and a genus are; the second definition, on the other hand, is sufficient on its own for recognizing what the thing meant is in and of itself.

**15** We may also include under the heading ‘accident’ the comparisons of things with one another which are stated in some way involving what goes with what, for example whether the noble or the expedient is to be preferred, or whether the life according to virtue or the life according to enjoyment is more pleasant, or anything else that might be stated in a way resembling these. For in all **20** such cases, the inquiry arises about which one it is the predicate goes with more.

It is clear at once that nothing prevents an accident from becoming a unique property at a time or with relation to something: sitting down, for instance, which is an accident, will be a unique property at a time when only one person is sitting, and when it is not only one person who is sitting it will be a unique property with relation to those who are not sitting. Consequently, nothing pre- **25** vents an accident from becoming a unique property either with relation to something or at a time; however, it cannot be a unique property without qualification.

### CHAPTER 6

**102b** **27** We should not forget that all arguments about unique properties, genera, and accidents are also appropriate to use in connection with definitions. For if we have shown that something fails to **30** belong uniquely to what falls under the definition (as we do in the case of a unique property), or that what is given as such in the definition is not the genus, or that something stated in the formula does not belong (as might also be said in the case of an accident), then we shall have refuted the definition. So, according to the account given previously, all the things we have enumerated would **35** in a way be definitory. But we should not for this reason seek a single universal method for all cases: for, in the first place, it would not be easy to find it; and besides, if it were found, it would be thoroughly obscure and inconvenient for the study at hand. On the other hand, if we were to give a unique method proper to each **103a** genus we have defined, a detailed treatment of our project would readily develop out of what falls appropriately under each of them. Consequently, we should divide them up in outline, as was said earlier, and as for what is left over, we should assign whatever is most appropriate to each division and call them ‘definitory’ or **5** ‘genus-like’. The aforementioned have largely been assigned to each of the divisions.

# COMMENTARY

### CHAPTER 4

**101b11–16.** ‘what our method consists of’: as the close echoes of this sentence in 103b39–104a2 show, there are two parts to this method. The first is a matter of *classifying* ‘what arguments are about’ and ‘what arguments are made from’; Aristotle says at the end of I. 9 that he has accomplished this task. The next part of the task is to give the means through which we may be ‘equipped to deal with these’. The term I translate ‘equipped to deal with’ (*euporein*) has as one common meaning ‘to have plenty of’, and many translators take this passage to mean ‘how we may be well supplied with arguments’. But for many of the occurrences of this word in the *Topics*, there is no indication of what it is that we are supposed to have plenty of (cf. 110b5, 111b38, 112a27, 112a35); ‘know how to deal with’ or ‘be skilled in handling’ fit these contexts better. Though this distinction seems minor, it is important. If Aristotle thought of his method as a matter of merely having a *large supply* of arguments, then it begins to resemble the teaching of his unsystematic predecessors who gave their students large collections of potted arguments to memorize (see Excerpt D). An art of dialectic instead gives the ability to find the premisses needed for proving the desired conclusion, and this is not a matter of having a supply of arguments but of *knowing what to do* when confronted with any particular conclusion. I have translated ‘be equipped to deal with’ in order to retain the suggestion of ‘having plenty’, though I think it is at most secondary.

‘Premiss’ (*protasis*) and ‘problem’ (*problema*) are central terms in the technical vocabulary of Aristotle’s logic. Both are derived from verbs: *protasis* from *proteinein*, literally ‘stretch out’, ‘hold out’, ‘offer’, and *problema* from *proballein*, ‘throw forward’, ‘put forward’. In ordinary use, *problema* means ‘thing put forward as a defence’, ‘obstacle’, or even ‘excuse’. In the context of dialectic, a ‘problem’ is a subject of argument: as Aristotle explains later (104b1–5), it is a question which is both important for some purpose and the subject of significant disagreement. But in the context of dialectical debate, this means that a problem is a proposition argued about, i.e. something which the questioner undertakes to attack and the answerer to defend.

The term *protasis* (‘premiss’) is not found before Aristotle, though his usage suggests that it was an established term of art in dialectical practice and not his coinage. Based on its derivation, a *protasis* should be the act of holding out or offering something (e.g. for approval), or that which is held out in such a way. In the context of dialectic, a premiss is a question offered by the questioner to the respondent. Of course, the purpose of making such an offering is to secure materials with which to construct a deduction (that is, to get premisses for an argument); thus, a premiss contains within it a proposition, to which the answerer is being asked to offer assent or dissent.

At bottom, then, premisses and problems are both propositions, though they are propositions put to different uses: a premiss is a proposition offered to a respondent in the form of a question, while a problem is a proposition that is the subject of disagreement between questioner and answerer. Of course, those uses impose their own requirements of suitability, making some propositions appropriate as premisses, others as problems: a premiss has no chance of being accepted if nobody would ever believe it, and a problem will not make a very good subject of debate if there is no disagreement about it (or if it bears on no interesting issue). Aristotle returns to these points in I. 10 and I. 11: see the Commentary on those chapters and on 101b28–36.

**101b17–36.** In order to be ‘equipped to deal with’ problems and premisses in a systematic way, we must first *classify* them, then learn methods for dealing with each *class*. A system for classifying propositions is therefore crucial to Aristotle’s dialectical art. The one he advocates begins by classifying the relationship asserted to hold between subject and predicate of a proposition: the predicate may be *definition* (*horos*), *genus* (*genos*), *unique property* (*idion*), or *accident* (*sumbebekos*) of the subject. In fact, as Aristotle mentions in passing, there is a fifth possibility: the predicate may also be the *differentia* (*diaphora*) of the subject. In later antiquity, these five ‘predicables’, as they were later called, took on considerable importance in metaphysics as well as logic. If we put ‘species’ in place of ‘definition’, we have the ‘five terms’ of Porphyry’s *Introduction to Logic* (commonly known under the title *Quinque Voces*), which became one of the most familiar handbooks of logic in the early Middle Ages.

The entire structure of the *Topics* rests on this fourfold division: Books II–III deal with accidents, IV with genera, V with unique properties, and VI and (in part) VII with definitions. But it appears that Aristotle adopts his fourfold classification in full awareness of the fivefold one. For instance, his classification of the difference as ‘genus-like’ (*genike*) makes it clear that he expected his audience to understand this term; why then does he seem to wish to suppress it? Furthermore, he actually begins with a *threefold* classification which omits to mention ‘definition’: but it is likely on several grounds that definitions were both the most venerable and the most important subject of debates (the association of defining with the early Academy is almost proverbial—see, however, the discussion of I. 8). Aristotle’s approach is argumentative, not simply expository: he is justifying his more sophisticated approach to an audience who can be assumed already to know the terminology.

Although he says nothing about it in the *Topics*, Aristotle elsewhere (most carefully in *On Interpretation*) distinguishes general predications such as ‘The horse is a mammal’ (in which both subject and predicate are general terms, or universals) from individual predications such as ‘Socrates is a man’ (in which the subject is an individual). But although this distinction is not discussed explicitly in the *Topics*, there are times when Aristotle seems to speak of predicable relationships between a predicate and an individual (e.g. 102b20–6). I return to this point in several places below. (See Geach 1972, Kneale and Kneale 1962, 63–7, on difficulties about the relationship between the predicables and the theories of *On Interpretation* and *An. Pr.* I.)

Here, Aristotle simply asserts that all predicates can be classified according to the predicables. Later, in I. 8, he tries to prove it.

**101b18–19.** This proposal somehow to include differentiae under the heading of genera is not reflected in the rest of the *Topics*: there are scattered mentions of differences in Book IV, the treatment of genera, but the most extensive discussion is in VI. 6, as part of the account of definitions.

**101b19–23.** This passage should not be taken to imply that ‘definition’ is a terminological innovation of Aristotle’s: the term was already in use in the Academy. Aristotle is instead recommending a new way of understanding definitions, and in particular urging that not just any identifying description that applies uniquely to a thing should count as its definition. It may be that in the Early Academy this was sometimes all that mattered about a definition (there is a story that Diogenes of Sinope lampooned a Platonic definition of humans as ‘featherless biped animals’ with a plucked chicken).

Aristotle’s usual word for definition in the *Topics* is *horos* (‘boundary’), although he sometimes uses the word *horismos* (‘that which limits’, from the verb *horizesthai*, which is in turn closely related to *horos*). There seems to be no difference in meaning between the two, but it is at least worth noting that *horismos* predominates outside the *Topics* and that in the *Analytics* the word *horos* almost always has the different technical sense ‘term’.

**101b28–36.** We should remember the distinctive argumentative roles of problems and premisses (see Commentary on 101b13–16) when interpreting Aristotle’s claim that the essential difference between them is their verbal form. A premiss is a certain type of question, i.e. one that admits of a yes-or-no answer, asked in the course of a dialectical exchange. A problem, by contrast, is a ‘question’ which a dialectical exchange undertakes to resolve, either in the affirmative or in the negative. Since a ‘question’ of this sort has two sides, it can also be put in the form of a yes-or-no question. However, a problem is not something *put as a question* in the course of an argument, but instead something attacked or defended by the entire argument. The difference in form Aristotle has in mind is, in Greek, the difference between an opening interrogative formula (*ara ge*, which I translate ‘is it the case that’: cf. Boethius’ ‘putasne’) and an expression (‘whether’) that in effect *names* a question. (Some interpreters take the ‘or not’ at the end of the two examples here to be the crucial distinction between premiss and problem, but as Alexander points out Aristotle sometimes adds ‘or not’ to premisses as well.)

In arguing that premisses and problems may be put into one–one correspondence by these syntactical transformations, Aristotle is putting to one side the extra-verbal properties which fit an utterance to serve as a premiss or problem in dialectical debate. Here, the point is that it is possible to extract, from any premiss or any problem, some *proposition*, that is, something which is either true or false: the problem ‘Whether virtue is more rewarding than vice’ and the premiss ‘Is virtue more rewarding than vice’ both are constructed from ‘Virtue is more rewarding than vice’. This is taken a step further in the *Prior Analytics*, where Aristotle defines a ‘deductive premiss’ (*protasis sullogistike*) as ‘the affirmation or denial of one thing of another’, abstracting this as a common element (much like ‘proposition’ for us) present in dialectical and demonstrative premisses. A related abstraction from argumentative role occurs in connection with ‘problem’. Since the ‘problem’ in a dialectical exchange is that which one tries to deduce (or deduce the contradictory of) as conclusion, it is a short move to give it the sense ‘conclusion’. In the *Prior Analytics* Aristotle is interested in determining what forms of arguments can yield different forms of conclusions, where the forms of conclusions are the four ‘categorical sentences’ (universal affirmative, particular affirmative, etc.). Thus, ‘problem’ comes to mean ‘type of conclusion’, or, at an even higher level of abstraction, ‘type of categorical sentence’: compare the way in which *kategoriai*, ‘predications’, becomes a shorthand for ‘kinds of predication’ (*ta gene tōn katēgoriōn*), i.e. ‘categories’ (see I. 9).

### CHAPTER 5

**101b38–102a5.** Defining, for Aristotle, is not lexicography but an activity of greater philosophical and scientific importance. He does acknowledge definitions that serve simply to explain what a word means (cf. *An. Post.* II. 10, 93b30–1), but for him a true definition defines, not a word, but the reality behind the word. It is less easy to say what the reality is that is defined. Generally, Aristotle associates definitions with universals rather than particulars. This implies that universals have some kind of reality, if it is possible to give definitions saying what they are.

The phrase ‘the what-it-is-to-be’ (*to ti ēn einai*) is one of the most heavily discussed of Aristotelian expressions. Word by word, it means ‘the what it *was* to be’, though the commentators assure us that ‘was’ has no temporal significance and thus amounts to ‘is’. The philosophical term ‘essence’ (or its Latin ancestor) was coined to serve as a translation of this phrase. I have generally avoided it in the translation, though I sometimes resort to ‘essence’ and ‘essential’ in the commentary. A what-it-is-to-be or essence is always a what-it-is-to-be *for something* (usually expressed in Greek with the dative). The definition of X tells what it is to be for X, or what it is for X to be. Accordingly, we sometimes find phrases like ‘the to-be for a human’ (*to anthrōpōi einai*: *An. Post.* 91b5–6, *Met.* 1006a34). Aristotle generally holds that only existing things can have essences, and thus non-existent or imaginary things cannot be defined: there is no definition of ‘goat-stag’ except in the sense of saying what the word means (*An. Post.* 92b5–8). Aristotle’s answers to the questions ‘What is a thing’s essence?’ and ‘What things have essences?’ are among the most difficult and disputed of issues in Aristotelian scholarship.

The word I translate ‘phrase’ is *logos*, a term with a wide range of senses: ‘speech’, ‘account’, ‘reason’, ‘ratio’, ‘understanding’. The contrasting term I translate as ‘word’ is *onoma*, which in everyday Greek most commonly means ‘name’. Aristotle’s requirement that a definition always be a *logos*, never an *onoma*, is more than an arbitrary stipulation. The difference between word and phrase here is at bottom a difference of two sorts of signifiers. A word, or name, simply designates; a phrase has a structure and therefore may carry with it an explanation (compare *An. Post.* II. 8–10, where Aristotle suggests that some definitions are a sort of compressed explanation of a thing’s cause). The underlying assumption is that defining is a type of analysis, replacing simple signifiers with articulated accounts of their significance. The grammatical division of speech into individual words is therefore a secondary matter, since a phrase can function as an unanalysable semantic unit.

**102a10–17.** This passage is one of several notes inserted into the text of I. 5 that try to clean up small details. Aristotle has just discussed two examples of ‘definitory’ things, and he summarizes with a general account of ‘definitory’ as ‘falling under the same method as definitions’. He then adds this note, showing that the *second* of his examples (arguments about whether things are the same) does indeed fit this account. Following this, there is a note on the note (‘what was just said’ again), alerting the reader to the fact that there is more to defining than simply showing things to be the same, so that the argumentative strategy indicated is only destructive. Such digressions are not only common in the *Topics*, they are also often clearly later additions, sometimes rejecting what has just been said, or even (in second-order notes) objecting to an objection. We may explain these notes by supposing that Aristotle worked over the treatise repeatedly, inserting comments and corrections; or by supposing that marginal remarks by later editors or commentators have crept into the text; or by supposing that this occasional fondness for digression is simply part of Aristotle’s style. Doubtless all three explanations are correct, on different occasions, though I believe the first is generally the most likely.

It seems at first that the *Topics* follows this suggested assimilation of questions about ‘same’ to ‘definition’: VII. 1, which immediately follows the discussion of definitions (VI), deals with ‘same’, and VII. 2 actually refers to our present passage. However, VII. 1 sits rather arbitrarily in its place: it follows a declaration at the end of VI that the discussion of definitions is over, and VII. 2 is clearly transitional.

**102a18–30.** Since the first part of this definition of ‘unique property’ is a purely negative characterization (following the restriction given at 101b19–23), the clause ‘belongs to it alone and counterpredicates with it’ indicates what is common to definitions and unique properties. As the present text shows, ‘A counterpredicates with B’ means ‘If anything is A then it is B, and if anything is B then it is A’. In modern terminology, this means that counterpredicating predicates are coextensive with each other. This might suggest a relatively broad interpretation for the undifferentiated notion of unique property, found in 101b18–23 and embracing definitions as well:

A is a (broad) unique property of B = A counterpredicates with B

But this has unexpected consequences. Counterpredication is symmetrical: if A counterpredicates with B, then B counterpredicates with A. Suppose now that A is the definition of B; then A counterpredicates with B, and therefore B counterpredicates with A, and therefore B is a unique property of A. Moreover, if we assume that ‘definition of’ is asymmetric, any definiendum is a unique property in the narrow sense of its definiens. In any event, if being a unique property is simply a matter of coextension, then any predicate might have unique properties. I do not think this is Aristotle’s intent. He thinks of the four predicables as possible relations between predicate and subject, and he does not generally think of the relation of predication as symmetrical. In order for A to be a unique property of B, it must first be predicated of B.

A number of difficulties can be raised about the interpretation of Aristotelian predications with general terms as their subjects (see above, 101b17–36 and Commentary). Here, I shall observe that the phrase ‘belongs to it alone’ makes the relationship ‘is a unique property of’ asymmetric and rules out definienda as unique properties of their definientia. Aristotle holds that *if* A belongs to B, *then* whatever is B is A; but this is a matter of entailment, not a definition or explication. On the most plausible interpretation, ‘A belongs to B alone’ means ‘A belongs to B and only to B’; where B is a general term, this would imply ‘Whatever is B is A, and only what is B is A’, and thus that A and B counterpredicate. However, ‘counterpredicates with’ is a consequence of ‘belongs only to’, not a definition of it, and therefore counterpredication is merely a necessary condition for being a unique property. In general, A can be a unique property of B only if A is predicated of B in the first place. (Thus, if ‘capable of laughing’ and ‘capable of speaking’ are both unique properties of humans and therefore counterpredicate, it still does not follow that either is a unique property of the other.)

The traditional rendering for *idion* is ‘property’, which in archaic English usage had exactly the right sense. However, its common use in modern philosophical parlance to mean ‘attribute’ makes this a poor (because confusing) choice. I have opted instead for ‘unique’, which gets precisely the sense of Aristotle’s definition, but I have added ‘property’ (in the modern sense) in order to get a substantival expression (and also to retain a verbal echo of the traditional rendering). ‘Unique’ by itself suffices when *idion* is used adjectivally.

**102a20.** ‘literate’: *grammatikē* is not grammatical knowledge but just the ability to read and write (Aristotle defines it himself at 142b31 as ‘knowing how to write down what is dictated and to read it back’).

**102a26–7.** ‘being on the right’: unlike Aristotle’s other examples, this only seems to make sense as a unique property of an individual, not a kind (cf. 103a33–9).

**102a31–5.** ‘Predicated in the what-it-is’ (*en tōi ti esti katēgoroumenon*): the explanation of this technical expression offered here is very close to the discussion of ‘what-it-is’ or ‘substance’ in I. 9 and is related to the characterization of a definition as ‘signifying the what-it-is-to-be’. To judge by 103b35–7, both a thing’s definition and its genus ‘say what it is’ and are thus predicated of it in the what it is. If the what-it-is of a thing is its essence, then predication in the what-it-is may be called ‘essential predication’. Although I believe it is best to preserve something approximating Aristotle’s construction in translation, I shall avail myself of this convenient phrase in the commentary.

In *An. Post.* I. 4 and elsewhere, Aristotle uses the closely related concept of *per se*, or ‘of-itself’, predication. A is predicated of B of-itself if either A is in the definition of B or B is in the definition of A.

The phrase ‘which are different in species’ introduces the term ‘species’. Although it receives no explicit attention in the *Topics*, this term belongs to the same conceptual environment as the other predicables (in Porphyry’s *Introduction to Logic*, it replaces ‘definition’). In one sense, ‘species’ is the correlative of ‘genus’: if A is the genus of B, then B is a species of A. So interpreted, genera and species may be regarded simply as universals in certain relationships, and the same universal may be both genus (of some universals) and species (of another), as mammals are a species of animal and genus of humans. In fact, we might expect that this will be true of most universals, although there will presumably be some ‘lowest’ species which have no further subspecies and some ‘highest’ genera which are not species of any further genera. These lowest species, since they are not genera, may be distinguished as species *simpliciter* from the higher species which are also genera. As for the highest genera, which are not themselves species, an ancient tradition identified them with Aristotle’s ‘categories’. Still more distinctions can be made. If A is a species of B and there is no term C which is genus of A and species of B, then B is the closest genus of A and A is an immediate species of B. Each of the immediate species of a genus is distinguished from its co-ordinate species by some characteristic which belongs to it uniquely among those species; this is the specific differentia, the ‘difference which makes the species’ (*eidopoios diaphora*: cf. 143b8).

A basis for this picture can be found scattered through Aristotle’s treatises. For the most part, however, he takes it as a given rather than something to be explained—probably because the picture derives from Plato’s Academy, where it was associated with the activity of determining definitions through a process of dividing a higher genus into its species, dividing these in turn, etc. Thus in this passage, even though Aristotle is offering definitions of basic technical terminology, he does not bother to explain ‘species’ at all. The hierarchical structure of genera and species was part of the intellectual common property of Aristotle and his audience.

Perhaps inadvertently, commentators have generally taken Aristotle to be defining ‘genus’ in an absolute sense here: A is a genus if A is predicated in the what-it-is of several things different in species. But he defines all the other predicables as relatives: A is definition, unique property of B if A stands in a certain relationship to B. The most direct way to put the present definition into this form is as follows:

A is genus of B = A is predicated in the what-it-is of B and of many things different in species from B

As spelt out, this definition would require that predication in the what-it-is be a kind of universal, not just general, predication. Such an extension is not difficult to imagine, although it is not clear that Aristotle is aware of the distinction. If A is genus of B, then is it also the genus of individual Bs (e.g. is animal the genus of Socrates and Plato)? Some passages seem to imply this (see *Cat.* 2 and 5 and the discussion of I. 9 below).

If, as the commentators say, the point of adding ‘different in species’ is to distinguish genera from species, then presumably something like the following would be a definition of ‘species’ taken absolutely:

A is a species = A is predicated in the what-it-is of many things, but not things different in species

That is, A is a species if and only if the things it is predicated in the what-it-is of do not differ in species from one another. This will hardly be an illuminating definition, of course, unless we have some other account of what ‘different in species’ means.

Further problems arise in connection with essential predication and the definition of ‘genus’: see the Commentary on I. 8.

**102a35–b3.** If it is Aristotle’s purpose to discuss what is ‘genus-like’, then it is odd that he does not discuss the differentia, which he has already so characterized at 101b18–19.

**102b4–7.** The term ‘accident’ (*sumbebēkos*) is the perfect participle of *sumbainein*, ‘happen’ or ‘accompany’. An accident of something, therefore, is something which merely happens to be true of it, or something which is incidental to it, or something which accompanies it. These are not equivalent; however, they all make appearances at different times in Aristotle’s usage. Complicating matters, Aristotle here gives us two definitions of ‘accident’ and assumes, without argument, that they are equivalent. The first of these—in effect, ‘none of the above’—guarantees (in a trivial way) that the four predicables exhaust the possible relations of predicate to subject. However, this definition will be equivalent to the second only on the further supposition that any predicate failing to be a definition, unique property, or genus satisfies it; and that is by no means obvious (see I. 8 below).

What does the second definition mean? If we take ‘at one time and not at another’ literally, Aristotle would have in mind an individual subject (‘one and the same thing’) to which the accident now belongs and now does not. An accident would then be a temporary or passing property:

A is an accident of X = A belongs to X at one time but not at another

However, Aristotle frequently uses temporal language to express modal qualifications (possibility and necessity), so that it may be equivalent to ‘contingent property’:

A is an accident of X = A belongs to X, but not necessarily

Alternatively, temporal language can sometimes express mere generalization: ‘always’ and ‘sometimes’ may mean ‘for every’, ‘for some’. On this reading, Aristotle may have in mind something like

A is an accident of B = Some As are Bs and some As are not Bs

It is consistent with this last reading that an accident A might belong necessarily to those Bs to which it does belong and necessarily not belong to those Bs to which it does not belong, so that A would be an accident of B in general but of no individual B. In fact, Aristotle does give us some examples of ‘accidents’ meeting this description: ‘odd’ is an accident of number, since some numbers are odd and some are not, even though it is not true of any particular number that it could, while remaining the same number, both be odd and not be odd. (Such accidents are in effect ‘necessary accidents’.)

Returning to I. 5, Aristotle’s two definitions of ‘accident’ are obviously not equivalent. If A is not a definition, unique property, or genus of B, then we can conclude that (i) A and B do not counterpredicate; (ii) A is not predicated of B and other things different in species in the what-it-is. If nevertheless ‘A belongs to B’, then what possibilities remain? At least two can be distinguished:

(i) A belongs to every B, but not in the what-it-is, and to other things as well
(ii) A belongs to some but not every B

Of these, only (ii) corresponds to a plausible sense of the second definition, and nothing Aristotle says rules out (i) as a possibility. We might still try to save the equivalence of the two by interpreting accidents as contingent predicates. It is plausible enough that definitions and genera are necessarily true of their subjects, and Aristotle makes it fairly clear that A is a unique property of B only if A and B *necessarily* counterpredicate, that is, only if they must be true of the same things (cf. 102a28–30). Thus, if A is contingently true of B, then it cannot be its definition, genus, or unique property.

Does the converse hold? No; the obvious counter-example is differentiae. As components of definitions, they must be necessary properties, but they are neither definitions nor unique properties nor genera. Moreover, Aristotle says nothing that would rule out still other examples of necessary properties, e.g. A might be necessarily true of whatever B is true of, and of other things as well, without being B’s genus.

The second definition recalls a statement in the *Categories*: ‘It seems most distinctive of substance that what is numerically one and the same is able to receive contraries’ (4a10–11). Already in the notion of an accident, Aristotle’s theory of predication is present. To say that an accident can either belong or not belong ‘to one and the same thing’ presupposes that it makes sense to talk of that same and single thing persisting, and remaining identical, while its accidents change. Some Greek philosophers before Aristotle had put forward denials of this claim, ranging from the serious and problematic (Parmenides) to the more superficial (the two brothers in Plato’s *Euthydemus*).

There are a number of other uses for the term ‘accident’ and the related phrase ‘by accident’ (*kata sumbebēkos*) in Aristotle’s works. Generally, these get their meanings by negation: an X ‘by accident’ is something that is called X but somehow fails to be X in some strict sense or in some paradigmatic way. Aristotle’s first definition follows this pattern.

See also the Commentary on I. 8.

**102b14–20.** Since this section depends on a sort of equivocation, it is difficult to translate it smoothly into English: as noted above, the word for ‘accident’ (*sumbebēkos*) is actually the perfect participle of the verb *sumbainein*, and therefore it may take on any of its meanings, ‘happen’, ‘result’, ‘go along with’. I have tried to reproduce this (very lamely) with the translation ‘accompany’.

*Top.* III. 1–3 contains a discussion of such comparisons involving what is ‘preferable’, and since this Book is an extension of II, which concerns accidents, it might seem that Aristotle is following his own suggestion in classifying them under the same head. However, as commentators have generally noticed, the arguments Aristotle is thinking of are almost certainly those he elsewhere calls ‘from more and less and likewise’, and discussions of these sorts of arguments are found in every Book, in connection with each of the predicables.

**102b20–5.** Compare 102a22–8, which introduces unique properties at a time or with respect to something rather as a concession, and 103a32–9. The distinction between unique properties without qualification and unique properties with some qualification is not as straightforward as at first appears. Aristotle says: the property of being seated, which is an accident, would be a unique property at a time when only one person was seated. Being seated is (presumably) an accident of the one person seated in the sense that it is a temporary property, in accordance with (one interpretation of) Aristotle’s earlier definition. Is it a genuine unique property? We cannot apply the counterpredication test, for there is only one predicate. Instead, we have a situation in which a predicate happens, at a certain time, to have an extension with exactly one member. In effect, then, that predicate can be used to construct a *definite description*, in modern terminology, which designates an individual: if there is one and only one person seated, then ‘the person seated’ succeeds in designating that person.

It may be instructive to compare this with full-fledged unique properties, which may be regarded as alternative ways of designating a species: if ‘capable of acquiring science’ applies to all and only humans, then it designates the human species. However, the question whether A is or is not a unique property of B is a question about the relationship between the extensions of A and B: if they are not the same, then A fails to be unique to B. By contrast, a definite description like ‘the one seated’ will fail to designate any individual if more than one person, or no person, is seated. The question whether ‘the one seated’ is a unique property of Socrates at a time thus contains two subsidiary questions: (i) Is it a unique property of *anyone* (i.e. is there exactly one person seated)? (ii) Is that person Socrates? In the case of a unique property of a species, it is not clear what would correspond to the first of these questions.

### CHAPTER 6

**102b27–103a5.** I. 6 is closely bound up with the remarks about what is ‘definitory’, etc., scattered through I. 5 (and with the comment about differences in I. 4, 101b18–19). The content is curious: first, Aristotle argues that we could really call all the ‘questions’ definitory; next, he says that this is no reason for seeking a single procedure, citing the elusiveness and inconvenience it would have; and then concludes that *for that very reason*, we should, as he said earlier (101a18–24), use an outline division and assign ‘what is left over’ to each subdivision, as seems most appropriate.

Now, this is in part a description of what Aristotle does, as indeed the last sentence indicates: those things which do not seem to fit into the fourfold scheme (such as differences, questions about sameness, questions about which of several things is so-and-so, or more so-and-so) should be plugged in to whichever of the four seems most appropriate. But this is an argument for sticking with a *broad* division, instead of a more detailed one, and putting up with the inconvenience of cases that do not fit well, whereas what Aristotle has just offered is a claim that we should *not* try for too general an account but should preserve the specialized subcategories.

Especially in view of the last sentence, I. 6 looks not very well fitted in to the text. Those inclined to speculate about Aristotle’s development might wish to explain both 101a18–24 and the present passage as later additions intended to reconcile apparent differences between the *Topics* and other treatises (in particular the *Prior Analytics*): Aristotle, or some later editor, is saying ‘these outline remarks will do for our present purposes, even if they conflict with what we say elsewhere.’

Contrast these reasons against looking for a ‘single universal method’ with Aristotle’s claim, *An. Pr.* I. 30, to have discovered a universally applicable system for finding premisses from which conclusions may be deduced (46a3–4; the system is expounded in I. 27–8). This might imply that the *Prior Analytics* is a later work and that Aristotle has changed his views. However, what Aristotle says in I. 6 is that such a universal method would be both hard to find and inconvenient for the practical purposes of an art of dialectic. It seems to me that, from the standpoint of the practical concerns of the *Topics*, that description fits the theory of the *Prior Analytics* quite well.

**102b38–103a1.** Aristotle indulges in a bit of play with words here that it is hard to resist trying to reproduce: if we give a ‘unique method’ (*idia methodos*) for each genus (*genos*) that has been ‘defined’ (*dihoristheis*, from the verb *dihorizesthai*) . . . Thus he manages to use the names of the first three of the predicables accidentally (or, as he might say, *kata sumbebēkos*) in this sentence.