### CHAPTER 7

**103a** **6** First of all, we must determine the number of ways that ‘same’ is used. We may regard the same as being divided, in outline, into three parts, for we are accustomed to describe what is the same as ‘in number’ or ‘in species’ or ‘in genus’. Those are the same in **10** number which have several names though there is one thing, for example a cloak and a coat. Those are the same in species which, though many, are indistinguishable with respect to species, for instance as a human (is the same in species) as a human or a horse the same as a horse (for those things are said to be the same in species which fall under the same species). Similarly, those are the same in genus which fall under the same genus (as a horse (is the same in genus) as a human).

**15** One might think that ‘same’ as it applies to water from the same spring has some differentia apart from those mentioned. But nevertheless, let this too be classified in the same group as things called the same with reference in some way to a single species, for all these sorts of cases appear to be of the same kind and comparable to one another. For all water is said to be the same in species as any **20** other water because it has a certain likeness, and water from the same spring only differs in that the likeness is stronger. That is why we do not separate this case from those which are called the same with reference in some way to a single species.

What is one in number is most uncontroversially called the same in everyone’s judgement. But even this is customarily indicated **25** in several ways. The strictest case, (where it is indicated in) the primary way, is when that which is the same is indicated by means of a word or a definition, e.g. a coat is the same as a cloak or a two-footed terrestrial animal as a human. The second way is when it is indicated by means of a unique property, e.g. what is receptive of knowledge is the same as a human or what is carried upwards by nature the same as fire. The third way is when it is (indicated) with **30** an accident, e.g. the one sitting (or the musical one) is the same as Socrates. For all these are intended to signify what is one in number.

(One might most readily come to see that this last remark is true from the case of people who change their way of calling someone. Sometimes we give an order, using a name, to call some person who is seated, and when the one we give the order to turns out not to **35** understand it, we change it—thinking he will understand it better from an accident of the person—and tell him to call to us ‘the one sitting’ or ‘the one talking’, obviously believing the same thing to be signified by the name as by the accident).

### CHAPTER 8

**103b** Let ‘same’, then, be divided in three as has been said.
One proof that arguments are made from and through the things mentioned previously, and are about them, is by means of induction. For if someone were to examine each premiss or problem, then it would be clear that it had arisen either about a definition, or **5** about a unique property, or about a genus, or about an accident.

Another proof is through deduction. For necessarily, whenever one thing is predicated of another, it either conterpredicates with the subject or it does not. And if it does counterpredicate, then it must be a definition or a unique property (for if it signifies what it **10** is to be something it is a definition, while if it does not it is a unique property—that is what we said a unique property was, something which counterpredicates but does not signify what it is to be). But if it does not counterpredicate with the subject, then either it is among the things stated in the definition of the subject or it is not. If it is among the things stated in the definition, then it must be a **15** genus or a differentia, since a definition is composed of a genus and differentiae. On the other hand, if it is not among the things stated in the definition, then it is clear that it must be an accident, for an accident was said to be what is neither a definition nor a unique property nor a genus but still belongs to the subject.

#COMMENTARY

### CHAPTER 7

**103a6–39.** The opening ‘first of all’ is puzzling: first of *what*? Interpreters generally suppose the explanation is the remark at 102a6–9 that the best part of argument about definitions concerns whether things are the same or different (102a36–b3, which refers to the question whether things are in the same genus or not, may also be relevant). But Aristotle offers no argumentative strategies concerning whether things are the same or different (those appear instead in VII. 1) and instead only distinguishes types of sameness. This is reminiscent of the ‘philosophical lexicon’ preserved for us as *Metaphysics* $\Delta$, and in fact what Aristotle says here about ‘same’ (*tauton*) overlaps the remarks he makes in *Metaphysics* $\Delta$ 6 about ‘one’ or ‘single’ (*hen*: note that in the present chapter he sometimes says ‘one’ rather than ‘same’).

**103a7–14.** Under ‘same’, Aristotle includes two different kinds of case. ‘Same in number’ amounts to ‘identical’; thus, if two things are the same in number there is only one thing, not two. Sameness in species and in genus, however, are clearly relationships between different things. This leads to a certain awkwardness. On Aristotle’s account, sameness in number looks like a relation between *expressions*, that is, two expressions that refer to the same individual. The clearest case of sameness in number would then appear to be an individual with two proper names, e.g. the one man known both as Mark Twain and as Samuel Clemens. Unfortunately, Aristotle’s account is less clear-cut: see the discussion of 103a23–31 below.

**103a11.** ‘indistinguishable with respect to species’: the word ‘species’ means ‘appearance’ or ‘look’ in ordinary parlance, and so this phrase (*adiaphora kata to eidos*) might also be rendered ‘indistinguishable with respect to their appearance’. (Compare *Met.* 1016a18–19, where Aristotle says that things are ‘indistinguishable’ if their form cannot be differentiated by perception.) Since Aristotle is almost certainly thinking of species in the technical sense here, it would be misleading to translate otherwise, but the association with appearance may still be present: cf. the remarks immediately following on water from the same spring.

**103a14–23.** The case of water from the same spring at first seems to raise no particular difficulty. Two buckets of water from the same spring are different in number (since they are separate things) but the same in species (since each is water); how then are they the same in a way that two arbitrary buckets of water are not? As the commentators interpret him, Aristotle’s response is that things the *same in species* are so called because they share some likeness or other (cf. 103a10–11 and Commentary). Buckets of water all share a certain likeness, and so they are the same in species; buckets of water from the same spring simply share a *stronger* likeness. Alexander compares the likeness shared by all humans and that shared by a pair of twins. But this has discomfiting consequences if we suppose that definitions and what-it-is-to-be are correlated with species: each pair of twins would constitute the entire membership of a species, and—assuming that there is only one correct definition for a thing—water from different springs would be *different* in species.

Aristotle may instead have something else in mind. Water is a stuff or material: it is not naturally divided into units in the way that e.g. people and horses are. Putting the same point linguistically, ‘water’ is a *mass term*. In English, mass terms are marked by a resistance to pluralization, indefinite articles, and discrete quantifiers: we do not say ‘two waters’, or ‘a water’ as we do ‘two horses’ or ‘a dog’. Nouns like ‘horse’ and ‘dog’ which do accept pluralization and indefinite articles in this way are *count terms*. Now Aristotle’s paradigmatic examples of words for substances are count terms (e.g. ‘man’ and ‘horse’ in *Cat.* 5). The status of mass terms is more problematic, both for Aristotle and for modern philosophers.

From an Aristotelian perspective, individuals falling under count terms have relatively clear-cut criteria of unity and identity: marginal problem cases aside, knowing what a cow is involves knowing how to count cows and how to tell the difference between one cow and another. By contrast, water, sand, air, mud, and other stuffs do not come in natural units, and there are no natural demarcations separating ‘one’ from ‘another’. Pour a bucket of water into three cups, and one bucket becomes three cups, but it is still the same thing. How are we to understand ‘the same’ here? Is it one thing that now exists in one place and now in three, or are the bucket and the cups instances of a single species?

Aristotle just may be responding to a specific way of viewing stuffs, namely, as *distributed individuals*: water, for instance, is a single entity consisting, at any moment, of all the water that there is. On such a view, different bits of water are like different parts of Socrates, and when I point to three buckets of water and say of each, ‘this is water’, it is like pointing to Socrates’ various limbs and saying of each ‘this is Socrates’. All water would then be the same *in number*. There is some intuitive plausibility to this in the case of water from the same source. At the same time, it is quite problematic to conceive of an individual the parts of which exist in separation from one another. Aristotle avoids this difficulty by assimilating ‘same’ applied to different pieces of *the same stuff* to sameness in species. However, he recognizes (as his commentators have generally not done) that this assimilation requires a defence, and therefore he gives one.

**103a15.** ‘has some differentia apart from those mentioned’: the phrase *echein tina diaphoran para tous eirēmenous tropous* has vexed translators, since it seems a very clumsy way to say ‘is different’. But *diaphora* is the technical term ‘differentia’, and Aristotle has just given the characteristics which differentiate three senses of ‘same’. I take him to be saying ‘you might think that this case exhibits a further differentia apart from those three’. Of course, since a species is characterized by its differentia, this amounts to ‘you might think there is another species of sameness besides these’.

**103a23–31.** ‘indicated in several ways’: the word *apodidotai* often means ‘explain’ or even ‘define’, but in the present case Aristotle most likely is thinking of different ways of *indicating* something which is the same as $X$: I can do so by using a word with the same meaning as $X$, or $X$’s definition, or $X$’s unique property, or some expression which under the present circumstances just happens to designate the same thing as $X$. Of these possibilities, Aristotle thinks of the first two as the ‘strictest’ or ‘most representative’ cases. (Compare *Met.* $\Delta$ 6, 1016b35ff., which discusses senses of ‘one’ that correspond very closely to these senses of ‘same’.) But he has earlier explained ‘same in number’ as ‘one thing with several names’; and if we take that explanation seriously, the *last* case seems best to illustrate it. After all, under the circumstances envisaged ‘Socrates’ and ‘the one sitting’ actually are two names for the same individual. By contrast, it is not at all clear what the ‘one thing’ is that has the two names ‘cloak’ and ‘coat’, since there are many *different* things called by either name. One might add that these different things are all cloaks and coats because they are the same *in species*.

A possible response is this: synonymous terms like ‘coat’ and ‘cloak’ *mean* the same thing. That is, they do not simply designate the same things but do so in virtue of having the same meaning. The same holds for a term and its definition. Unique properties (apart from accidental ones) do not have the same meaning but nevertheless are necessarily coextensive: thus, they necessarily designate the same things. By contrast, expressions which accidentally designate the same thing do so only because under the special features of a situation, one of them turns out to designate exactly what the other does. Thus, they do not have the same meanings, and it is only a coincidence that they designate the same things.

If this is what Aristotle has in mind, then he may be distinguishing between *what* an expression applies to and the *way* in which it applies to it. Comparable distinctions do occur in Aristotle: thus, he will sometimes say that two things ‘are the same, though their being (*einai*) is different’—meaning that they coincide, even necessarily, but are distinct in nature or definition. There may be a hint of such a distinction in Aristotle’s way of describing his cases. When he says that ‘this is customarily indicated in several ways’, we may take him to mean ‘there are several ways in which I may *indicate* something that is the same as $X$.’ One way to do so is to use an expression which *means* the same as $X$ (a synonym or a definition): this can be thought of as the primary way to indicate ‘what is the same’ because the two expressions not only necessarily apply to the same thing but do so *in the same way*, that is, in virtue of the same meaning. A second, and less strict, way to do so is by giving a unique property of $X$, which necessarily applies to the same thing but in virtue of a different meaning. The least strict way is to find something which happens to apply to the same thing as $X$, but only coincidentally.

**103a32–9.** This explanation applies only to the last case, things accidentally the same. Presumably, Aristotle regards this weakest case as so weak that someone might object that it does not even count, and therefore he gives an argument for it. Underlying it there may be a hint of the principle that two expressions are the same if they can be substituted for one another without change of meaning (thus, the command given is the same when we replace a name by ‘the one sitting’).

### CHAPTER 8

**103b** Let ‘same’, then, be divided in three as has been said.

One proof that arguments are made from and through the things mentioned previously, and are about them, is by means of induction. For if someone were to examine each premiss or problem, **5** then it would be clear that it had arisen either about a definition, or about a unique property, or about a genus, or about an accident.

Another proof is through deduction. For necessarily, whenever one thing is predicated of another, it either counterpredicates with the subject or it does not. And if it does counterpredicate, then it must be a definition or a unique property (for if it signifies what it **10** is to be something it is a definition, while if it does not it is a unique property—that is what we said a unique property was, something which counterpredicates but does not signify what it is to be). But if it does not counterpredicate with the subject, then either it is among the things stated in the definition of the subject or it is not. If it is among the things stated in the definition, then it must be a **15** genus or a differentia, since a definition is composed of a genus and differentiae. On the other hand, if it is not among the things stated in the definition, then it is clear that it must be an accident, for an accident was said to be what is neither a definition nor a unique property nor a genus but still belongs to the subject.

***

### COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 8

**103b1–19.** Aristotle now tries to establish the claim asserted in 101b13–18 that all dialectical arguments are ‘made from’ (*ek*) and ‘about’ (*pros*) the predicables. Here, ‘from’ and ‘through’ correspond to ‘from’ in 101b13–18 (perhaps distinguishing premisses from other parts of the reasoning), while ‘about’ corresponds to ‘about’ (*pros*) and ‘concerning’ (*peri*) in earlier text. Since he has already recognized a sort of equivalence between the problems arguments are about and the premisses they are made from, what he needs to do is establish that in every predication, the predicate stands in one of the predicable relationships to the subject. ‘Proof’: *pistis*, as at 100b19 (cf. Commentary on 100a27–b3). Aristotle offers two proofs, one through induction (*epagōgē*) and one through deduction (according to I. 12 and passages in other works, induction and deduction comprise the two species of argument). The proof through induction simply consists in telling us what such a proof would rest on, viz. the examination of individual problems and premisses to see that each one always falls under the fourfold division.

The proof through deduction makes use of the scheme of division shown in Fig. 1:

#### Fig. 1: Scheme of Division for Predicates

```
                  Predicates
                 /          \
    Counterpredicating      Not counterpredicating
      /            \             /            \
Signifying what  Not signifying  In the        Not in the
it is:           what it is:     definition:   definition:
DEFINITION       UNIQUE          GENUS or      ACCIDENT
                 PROPERTY        DIFFERENTIA
```

Since each division in the schema is a dichotomy, using a property and its negation, every predicate must fall into one and only one of the four lowest classifications. Therefore, Aristotle has a sound argument for the completeness of the classification presented here. However, it is not obvious that this schema corresponds to the divisions made in I. 5.

The problem is the definition of ‘genus’ (definitions and unique properties are defined as before, accidents in accordance with the first definition at 102b4–5). The division which captures genus and differentia yields the following definition:

> A is genus or differentia of B = A is predicated of B and does not counterpredicate with B and is in the definition of B

We might see the first two components of this as equivalent to ‘A is predicated of B and of other things besides’, which in turn is close to the ‘predicated of many things’ in the definition of ‘genus’ at 102a31–2. Unfortunately, a case can be made that differentiae are usually, if not always, counterpredicated of their species. Furthermore, we now find ‘stated in the definition’ in place of ‘predicated in the what-it-is’. This allows Aristotle to make explicit the conception of a definition as composed of genus and differentia, but he does not tell us what the difference between these two is nor explain why a definition must have this form (nor does he do so in I. 5). What his argument actually establishes is the unexciting result that if A is predicated of B, then A must be the definition of B, a unique property of B, one of the things in B’s definition, or *something else*. This hardly shows that every predicate must be in one of the *four* predicable relations Aristotle has defined, since differentiae are now included; it does not explain how this division is related to the earlier definition of ‘genus’, nor how to distinguish genus and differentia; and, as in I. 5, it says nothing about the second definition of ‘accident’ at 102b6–7.

We can perhaps improve Aristotle’s argument by calling on other texts, especially *Top.* IV. 2, IV. 5, and VI. 6 (the last is the closest thing in the *Topics* to an account of differentiae). First, the distinction between a genus and a differentia is that a genus ‘signifies what its subject is’ (*ti sēmainei*) whereas a differentia ‘signifies what sort it is’ (*poion ti sēmainei*: see e.g. VI. 6, 144a17–22). This can be put into rough correspondence with the requirement of 102a31–2 that the genus is ‘predicated in the what-it-is’: it is appropriate to give a thing’s genus, not its differentia, in answer to the question ‘what is it?’ (Aristotle gives this distinction in IV. 6, 128a23–6). Thus, we could add a subdivision to the schema shown in Fig. 1 (see Fig. 2).

#### Fig. 2: Subdivision of "Stated in the Definition"

```
            Stated in the definition
           /                       \
Signifies what it is:        Signifies what sort it is:
      GENUS                        DIFFERENTIA
```

For this to work, then, there must be a difference between ‘predicated in the what-it-is’ and ‘stated in the definition’. Unfortunately, Aristotle is not very clear on this point: at VII. 3, 153a17–22, he says that both genus and differentia are predicated in the what-it-is, and elsewhere (e.g. *An. Post.* I. 4) ‘in the what-it-is’ just seems to mean ‘contained in the definition’. Aristotle’s views here may be unsettled: IV. 6, 128a20–9, the closest thing in the *Topics* to an explicit account of the difference between genus and differentia, begins ‘Since some people think the differentia is also predicated of the species in the what-it-is’. See the Introduction for more on this topic.

**103b15–16.** ‘composed of a genus and differentiae’: Aristotle usually insists that a definition is composed of a *proximate* genus and its specific differentia, so the plural ‘differentiae’ is a bit surprising. However, he sometimes recognizes another conception according to which a definition consists of a higher genus and progressive differentiae of a species of this, a subspecies of that species, etc., and he may have this in mind here.