### CHAPTER 15

**106a** Concerning premisses, then, what has been said is enough. But as for the number of ways <something is said>, our investigation should not only study which things are called something in different ways but should also try to give definitions for them. For instance, **5** we should say, not only that justice and courage are called goods in one way while that which produces fitness and the healthful are so called in another way, but also that the former are so called in virtue of themselves being of a certain sort, whereas the latter are so called in virtue of being productive of something, and not in virtue of themselves being of a certain sort. And likewise also in the other cases.

Whether the ways in which things are called something are many **10** or one in species should be investigated by means of the following:

First is to examine the contrary to see if it is said in several ways and if they disagree either in species or in name. For sometimes, there is a difference right in the very names, e.g. the contrary of ‘sharp’ is ‘flat’ in a sound but ‘blunt’ in a body. It is clear, then, that the contrary of ‘sharp’ is said in many ways. But if that is, then so **15** is ‘sharp’. For in each of these cases, the contrary will be different—the same ‘sharp’ will not be contrary to ‘blunt’ and ‘flat’—but ‘sharp’ is contrary to each. Again, the contrary of ‘flat’ is ‘sharp’ in sound but ‘round’ in body. Therefore, ‘flat’ is said in several ways, since its contrary is also. And similarly, also, in the case of a picture **20** the contrary of ‘fine’ is ‘ugly’, but in the case of a lineage it is ‘base’, so that ‘fine’ is equivocal.

In some cases, there is no disagreement at all in the names, but in the species the difference between them is obvious at once, as in the case of ‘bright’ and ‘dark’: for a sound is called bright or **25** dark, and similarly a colour. Now in names, these do not disagree; in the species, however, the difference between them is obvious at once, for the colour and the sound are not called bright in the same way.

This is also clear through sensory perception. For the same sense **30** perceives things which are the same in species. But we do not discern white in the case of a sound and a colour by means of the same sense: rather, we discern one by sight and the other by hearing. The same holds for ‘rough’ and ‘smooth’ in tastes and in bodies (except that we discern one with touch and the other with taste): **35** these too do not disagree in names—either those which apply to them or those which apply to their contraries—for ‘smooth’ is in fact the contrary of each.

Next, if there is something contrary to one but nothing at all contrary to the other. For example, to the pleasure which comes from drinking, the pain which comes from being thirsty is contrary, but to <the pleasure> which comes from contemplating the fact that the diagonal <of a square> is incommensurable with its side **106b** nothing is <contrary>. Thus, pleasure is said in many ways. And to the loving that is a matter of thought, hating is contrary, but to that which is a bodily activity, nothing is: it is clear, then, that loving is equivocal.

Next, turning to the intermediates, if there is something intermediate for one <pair of contraries> but nothing for the other, or if **5** there is something for both but not the same thing. For instance, between bright and dark in colour there is ‘grey’, but in sound there is none—or, if indeed there is one, it is ‘nasal’, as some people say that a nasal voice is intermediate. So, ‘bright’ is equivocal, and likewise also ‘dark’. Next, if there are several intermediates for one **10** pair but one for the other, as in the case of bright and dark: for in the case of colours the intermediates are many, while in the case of sound there is the single one ‘nasal’.

Next is examining the contradictory opposite to see if it is said in multiple ways. For if this is said in multiple ways, then that which is **15** opposite to it will also be said in multiple ways. For instance, ‘not to see’ is said in multiple ways, one being ‘not to possess sight’ and the other ‘not to exercise one’s sight’. But if this is said in multiple ways, then ‘to see’ must be also: for to each ‘not seeing’ something is opposed, i.e. having sight to not having it, or exercising one’s **20** sight to not exercising it.

Next is examining things which are expressed as privation and state. For if one of these is said in multiple ways, then the remaining one is also. For instance, if ‘sensation’ is said in multiple ways of the soul and of the body, then ‘insensible’ will also be said in multiple ways of the soul and of the body. (And that it is as **25** privation and state that the things just mentioned are opposed is clear, since it is natural for animals to have each kind of sensation, both that with respect to the soul and that with respect to the body.)

Next, inflected forms should be examined. For if ‘justly’ is said in **30** multiple ways, then ‘just’ will also be said in multiple ways (for there is a ‘just’ in accordance with each ‘justly’). For instance, if ‘justly’ means both judging in accordance with one’s own opinion and <judging> as one ought, then so also ‘just’. Likewise, if ‘healthful’ is said in multiple ways, then ‘healthfully’ will also be **35** said in multiple ways. For instance, if what produces health, what preserves it, and what indicates it are healthful, then ‘healthfully’ will mean ‘productively’ or ‘preservatively’ or ‘indicatingly’ <of health>. And similarly also in other cases: whenever a term itself is said in multiple ways, then the inflected form derived from it will **107a** also be said in multiple ways; and if the inflected form is, then so is the term itself.

There is also examining the categories of predication of the word to see if these are the same in all cases. For if they are not the same, it is clear that the expression is equivocal. For instance, the good in **5** foods is what produces pleasure, in medicine what produces health; but in the case of the soul, it is being of a certain sort (e.g. temperate, courageous, or just) and similarly in the case of a person. Sometimes, it is a time, e.g. what is opportune <is good> (for that which is opportune is called good). Often, it is a quantity, as in the **10** case of what is proportionate (for the proportionate is also called good). Consequently, ‘good’ is equivocal.

Likewise, bright is a colour in the case of a body, but in the case of a sound it is the easy to hear. Sharp is much like this, for likewise the same thing is not meant in all cases. For it is the rapid sound **15** which is sharp (as those who do numerical harmonics say), but it is the angle less than a right one which is sharp, or the sharp-angled knife.

And there is examining the genera of the things under the same word to see if these are different and not subordinate to one another. Take ‘donkey’ as an example (both the animal and the **20** machine). For the definition of the word is different for these: the one will be given as ‘an animal of a certain sort’, the other as ‘a machine of a certain sort’. But if the genera are subordinate to one another, then it is not necessary for the definitions to be different. For instance, animal and bird are both a genus of raven. When we say, then, that a raven is a bird, we also say that **25** it is a certain kind of animal, so that both genera are predicated of it. And similarly, also, when we call a raven a flying biped animal, we say that it is a bird. Also in this way, then, both genera, as well as their definitions, are predicated of the raven. But in the case of genera which are not subordinate to one another, this **30** does not happen. For when we call something a machine, we do not call it an animal; nor, when we call it an animal, do we call it a machine.

And there is examining not only the term under consideration to see if the genera are different and not subordinate to each other, but also its contrary (for if its contrary is said in many ways, then it **35** is clear that what is under consideration is also).

It is also useful to examine the definition we have of a complex, e.g. of a white body or a white sound: for if what is unique <to each> is subtracted, the same definition must remain. But this does **107b** not happen in the case of equivocals, e.g. in the cases just mentioned: for one is ‘a body having such and such a colour’, but the other is ‘a sound easy to hear’. When we subtract ‘body’ and ‘sound’, then, what remains in each case is not the same: but it **5** would have to be, if the ‘white’ said in each case were univocal.

But frequently something equivocal tags along unnoticed in the definitions themselves, and for this reason you should also examine the definitions. For instance, if someone says that what indicates and what produces health is what is commensurately related to **10** health, we should not give up but instead should examine what he has meant by ‘commensurately’ in each case, e.g. if one is ‘of such an amount as to produce health’ and the other is ‘such as to signify of what sort one’s condition is’.

Next, if they fail to be comparable with respect to ‘more’ or ‘equally’, as for instance a white sound and a white coat, or a sharp **15** taste and a sharp sound. For these are not called equally white or sharp, nor is one called more so than the other. So ‘white’ and ‘sharp’ are equivocal. For everything univocal is comparable: either they will be equally so called, or one will be more so.

Since the differentiae of things from different genera that are not subordinate to one another are also different in kind (take for **20** example animal and knowledge: the differentiae of these are different), there is examining whether the things falling under the same word are differentiae of different genera that are not subordinate to one another, like ‘sharp’ of a sound and of a body: for one sound differs from another by being sharp, and similarly one body from **25** another, so that ‘sharp’ is equivocal (for these are differentiae of different genera that are not subordinate to one another).

Next, if the differentiae of the actual things the same name applies to are different, as colour in the case of bodies and colour in melodies. For the differentiae of colour in the case of bodies are ‘distending the sight’ and ‘compressing the sight’, but the differen- **30** tiae of colour in the case of melodies are not the same. So, ‘colour’ is equivocal, for the same things have the same differentiae.

Next, since the species is not a differentia of anything, there is examining the things falling under the same word to see if one is a species and the other a differentia. For instance, white in the case of **35** bodies is a species of colour, but white in the case of sounds is a differentia (for one sound differs from another in virtue of being white).

# COMMENTARY

### CHAPTER 15

This lengthy section (**106a1–107b37**: almost a fourth of Book I) is almost entirely concerned with tests for detecting things ‘said in many ways’. What Aristotle says is sensible and could still serve as a useful guide for detecting ambiguities and distinctions of type. Despite his initial remarks, Aristotle does not also try to give definitions for different senses, but that is hardly surprising: the tests are general tests, whereas definitions would necessarily concern specific cases.

**106a1–8.** There is an ambiguity in the term *legetai*, ‘is said’ or ‘is called’, which should be borne in mind here. Any case of things ‘said in many ways’ will involve two *things*, X and Y, and one *name* N which applies to both. In such a case, X and Y are ‘called’ (*legetai*) N, and the question whether this is ‘in many ways’ is the question whether they are so called in the same way. But as noted above (Comments on I. 13), Aristotle may also say that the name N is ‘said of’ (*legetai* again) the things X and Y. So construed, the question becomes whether N is said of X and Y in many ways or in one. Of these two ways of interpreting ‘is said’, the first (where the subject of ‘is said’ is the things the name applies to) is more fundamental. Aristotle’s example in **106a4–8** can only be taken in this way (‘justice’, etc., are in the nominative case and thus must be the subjects of ‘called’), and I have taken this to be true for the entire opening section **106a1–8**. But as the discussion progresses, we often find that it is clearly the word which is ‘said in many ways’ of several subjects; sometimes the phrase ‘said in many ways’ (*pollachōs legetai*) can plausibly be read either way. I have tried to use an unambiguous construction when only one sense of ‘is said’ will fit, but in many instances my text is as ambiguous as Aristotle’s.

Aristotle uses the brief phrase ‘the how many’ (*to posachōs*) to abbreviate the longer name of the second tool at **105a23–4**. I translate with an equally compressed ‘the number of ways’. The ‘definitions’ are not necessarily definitions of the different senses but perhaps only accounts of the ways in which they differ.

The rules which follow use a set of grammatical and syntactical categories prominent in several places in the *Topics*. For a fuller discussion of these categories and their functions, see the Introduction, and for fuller examples of Aristotle’s use of it see II. 8–11, translated as Excerpt A. In the present chapter, we find first a discussion of ‘opposites’ (**106a10–b28**), subdivided into contraries (**106a10–b12**), negations (**106a13–20**), and privation/possession (**106b21–8**); next, inflections (**106b29–107a2**); and a brief mention of rules involving ‘more and less’ (**107b13–18**). These tests appear to be offered not as devices for convincing someone else in argument that a term has many senses, but as a means for determining this for oneself.

**106a9–10.** This sentence begins, word for word, ‘Whether it is said in many ways or in one way in species’; I take ‘said’ to continue to mean ‘called’, as in the preceding passage. ‘In species’ is difficult. Sameness in species is one of the three types of sameness distinguished in I. 7, and the phrase ‘in species’ naturally recalls that distinction here. But then, Aristotle would be contrasting ways of application of a word which are *specifically* the same with those which are either generically or numerically the same; and it is obscure just what those alternatives might be. Alexander instead reads the phrase as equivalent to ‘in definition’ (97. 20–98. 3) and appeals to Aristotle’s definition of ‘equivocal’ in *Cat.* 1a1 ff. as ‘with one name but different definitions’ (see Comments below on **106a20–2**); *pollachōs tōi eidei legetai* would then mean something like ‘called <by the same name but> in many ways with respect to definition’. This may be what Aristotle means, but it is hardly well expressed. One final possibility is that ‘in species’ here has some connection with its use in **106a23–35**, where it refers to the species of the *things* to which the term in question applies (see Comments below). None of these solutions is very convincing.

**106a10.** ‘To examine’: Aristotle uses an infinitive (*skopein*) because he is giving a list of things one can do to test for ambiguity. See the Introduction, pp. xxix–xxx, on the comparable use of infinitives in expressing ‘locations’.

**106a10–22.** Suppose X and Y are both called N; what, in the case of X and Y respectively, is the contrary of N? If in application to X it is M, while in application to Y it is P, then X and Y are called N in different ways. Thus, Aristotle appeals to an underlying principle that to a term used in a single sense there can be only a single contrary.

The examples are naturally difficult to reproduce nicely in English, since they depend on ambiguities of Greek words. ‘Sharp’ (*oxu*) really means ‘high’ in application to a musical pitch; its opposite in this sense is *baru*, which means ‘heavy’ in application to bodies and is thus opposed to ‘light’ (*kouphon*); my ‘flat’ and ‘rounded’ are attempts at maintaining the parallel. And a knife that is not ‘sharp’ is ‘blunt’ (*amblu*).

In translating I. 15, I have been rather free with the use of inverted commas. It is possible to indicate, in Greek, that one is mentioning a word or phrase rather than using it by prefixing it with a neuter definite article. Sometimes, this construction is unequivocally recognizable: if, for instance, the phrase is not a neuter noun (*to aretē* could only mean ‘the word “virtue”’). However, in many cases the same construction could equally well express abstraction: *to oxu*, for instance, could be either ‘the word “sharp”’ or ‘the sharp’ (i.e. that which is sharp, or sharpness). Aristotle’s examples in I. 15 generally fall into this ambiguous category.

**106a20–2.** ‘“fine” is equivocal’: The term ‘equivocal’ (*homōnumon*) can be understood in two ways, corresponding to the two readings given above for ‘said in many ways’ (see **105a23–4** and comments). But in most instances, for Aristotle it is things not words that are *homōnuma*, ‘like-named’. In *Cat.* 1a1–15 Aristotle defines ‘equivocal’ to mean ‘sharing only the name, not the definition’; thus, ‘equivocal’ things are things to which a single term applies but with different definitions. Such equivocals are ‘called the same thing in different ways’. Things which share both a term and the associated difference are ‘univocals’ (*sunōnuma*: literally, ‘named together’). This is not easy to align with English usage: we say that the word ‘sharp’ is equivocal because it applies to cheeses and to knives in different ways, whereas Aristotle says that *cheeses and knives* are equivocally called ‘sharp’ because the same word applies to them but in different ways. English ‘homonym’ and ‘synonym’ are still further removed in sense from their Greek cognates, Aristotle’s *homōnumon*/*sunōnumon*.

If X and Y are both called A but different definitions of A apply to each, then X and Y are equivocally A. However, Aristotle also says in such a case that the term A is equivocal; similarly, if X and Y are univocally A, then A is univocal. As with the expression ‘said in many ways’, the latter senses of ‘equivocal’ and ‘univocal’ are the more common in I. 15.

*Kalon* (which I translate ‘fine’) means ‘beautiful’ (in application to anything), but in connection with persons can also mean ‘noble’ (in application to persons, especially in the phrase *kalos kai agathos*). The word I translate ‘picture’ (*zōion*) literally means ‘animal’, but the sense ‘picture’ seems to fit better with the passage.

**106a23–35.** We should now expect Aristotle to turn to the case in which the contrary of N, in application to X as well as Y, is the same term M. He does give such an example: ‘bright’ and ‘dark’ are contraries of one another both in application to colours and in application to sounds, and so ‘bright’ is not detected as equivocal by the first test. We should then expect him to continue on these lines: even though the same name ‘dark’ applies to the contrary in each case, nevertheless these differ ‘in species’; therefore, since ‘dark’ is equivocal, so is its contrary ‘bright’. Instead, Aristotle gives an independent argument that sounds and colours are not the same in species. In other words, instead of arguing that M must be applied in different ways to X and Y because its contrary is different for each, he argues that M must be applied in different ways because *X and Y themselves* are different in species. On what principle does this argument rely? There is no reason to suppose that in general a term must take on different senses when it applies to things different in species: cows and horses are different in species, but ‘black’ applies to both in the same way. However, it is possible that ‘species’ here means ‘category’ (in the technical sense), so that the principle is: a term cannot be said in the same way of items in distinct categories. Such a principle is important elsewhere in the treatises. For instance, it underlies the argument in *EN* I. 6 that there cannot be a single Idea of good because the term ‘good’ can be applied to substances, qualities, and relations (**1096a19–23**).

The example involving touch and taste repeats the terms I translate earlier as ‘sharp’ and ‘flat’. Here, to get a better English example, I switch to ‘rough’/‘smooth’.

**106b13–20.** ‘Contradictory’ opposites are the third variety of opposite. It may be worth noting that the verb I translate ‘see’ (*blepein*) means both ‘look at’ and ‘be able to see’; it is not cognate with the word I translate ‘sight’ (*opsis*). ‘Multiple ways’ (*pleonachōs*): though this seems equivalent to ‘many ways’ (*pollachōs*), it carries a suggestion of ‘too many ways’.

**106b21–8.** The third kind of opposite is the pair ‘privation and state’ (*sterēsis kai hexis*). As **106b25–8** indicates, a privation is the absence of something which it is natural for things of a particular kind to have, as for instance blindness is the absence of ability to see in an animal which naturally or normally is sighted. The term opposed to this, ‘state’ (*hexis*), is derived from the verb *echein* (‘have’). Aristotle uses it in a wide range of meanings: ‘condition’, ‘disposition’ (thus both knowledge and virtue are *hexeis*), even ‘characteristic’. In the present context, it means having that of which the privation is the lack. (On privation and state, see also *Cat.* 10, **12a26–b37**; *Met.* $\Delta$. 20, $\Delta$. 22.)

What exactly are the two senses here in which something can be said to be ‘insensible’ (*anaisthēton*)? Alexander suggests that the point is the ambiguity of the verb *aisthanesthai*, which can apply either to sensory perception or to mental apprehension (similar ambiguities apply to many verbs of perception in English). Thus, perceiving ‘with respect to the soul’ would mean ‘understanding’, while perceiving ‘with respect to the body’ would refer to sense perception. The ‘insensible’ corresponding to the first of these would then be either ‘unconscious’ or ‘lacking in understanding’; that corresponding to the second, some deprivation of a sensory modality. If this is correct, then the last sentence is problematic, since Aristotle does not believe that all species of animals naturally have both sense perception and the ability to understand: we would have to interpret it to mean something like ‘animals naturally have each kind of perception that they do have’.

A different ambiguity may be involved instead. In Greek, ‘perceive’ (*aisthanesthai*) is a deponent verb, having passive endings but an active meaning. As a result, some of its forms can mean both ‘perceive’ and ‘be perceived’. It is the soul of the perceiver which *aisthanetai* in the first sense, the object perceived which *aisthanetai* in the second. This ambiguity carries over to *anaisthētos*, which can mean either ‘not such as to be perceived’ or ‘not such as to perceive’ (‘insensible’ catches a little of the same ambiguity). Aristotle’s last sentence will then amount to ‘it is natural for animals both to perceive and to be perceived’.

**106b29–107a2.** The second major component of the *Topics* system, ‘inflected forms’ (*ptōseis*), makes a brief appearance here. Under this heading, Aristotle usually includes only the adverbial forms of adjectives ending in *-ōs* (rather like English adverbs in *-ly*), but occasionally other grammatical inflections of a noun or adjective are called *ptōseis* (conjugated forms of verbs are included at *Cat.* 3, **16b16–17**).

The second example (‘healthful’) is difficult to translate. I have translated his adverbs *poiētikōs*, *phulaktikōs*, *sēmantikōs* with inelegant English adverbs ‘productively’, ‘preservingly’, ‘indicatingly’, because paraphrases like ‘productive of health’, etc., obscure the fact that Aristotle is appealing to the forms of the words themselves. (These are not common words in Greek and may have sounded just as inelegant to Aristotle’s contemporaries.)

**107a3–17.** Suppose that N applies both to X and to Y. We may then ask: what *category* of thing is N in X and in Y respectively? If the answers are different, then X and Y are only equivocally N. Aristotle’s examples illustrate this, but their structure is complex since he gives more than one example for each of the contrasted senses of application. Suppose that N is ‘good’, X is food, and Y is a soul. Then, X is called good in virtue of being productive of something, but Y is so called in virtue of being of a certain sort. This is a distinction of ‘category’ since the first falls under action, the second under quality. We get the same results if we let X be medicine, or if we let Y be a person. Again, to take Aristotle’s last example, let N be ‘sharp’ and let X and Y be a sound and an angle. Then, N applies to X in virtue of X’s being rapid (which may be seen as a quality) and to Y in virtue of Y’s being in a certain relationship to something (i.e. less than a right angle). The middle example, ‘bright’ in sound and in colour, is less easy to characterize. Colours are paradigmatic Aristotelian examples of qualities; it is less certain what category ‘easy to hear’ falls under, but Aristotle may be thinking of it as a relative, which would give the middle example the same structure as the last.

The discussion of senses of ‘good’ closely resembles a position stated in *EN* I. 6, **1096a23–9**: ‘good’, like ‘is’, has a different sense in application to each category, and thus there cannot be a single Platonic Idea of goodness. In the present text, Aristotle only advances the more modest claim that since ‘good’ is applicable to things in *several* categories, it must be equivocal.

The doctrine that ‘good’ and ‘one’ systematically vary their meanings in application to the different categories is of major importance to Aristotle’s mature views, especially in the *Metaphysics*. It may therefore be significant that from this point until the end of I. 15, Aristotle switches from ‘said in many ways’ to ‘equivocal’. (The one exception, at **107a34**, is in a passage that draws on a result from the earlier part of the chapter: see below.) This may be slight evidence that the two halves of I. 15 were written at different times, which in turn may have some bearing on the development of the doctrines in the *Metaphysics*.

**107a12–17.** Alexander assigns the bright in bodies to the category of quality, that in sounds to action (i.e. having a certain effect on the hearer). He interprets the three kinds of sharp as belonging to the categories of action (‘rapid motion’), relation (less than a right one), and quality (i.e. a certain shape). ‘Those who do numerical harmonics’ are Pythagorean music theorists.

**107a36–b5.** A ‘complex’ is something denoted by a phrase, e.g. a pale man. (Aristotle noted that definitions of phrases may be given in **101b38–102a2**). This test rests on the general rule that equivocal things share only a name, univocal things both a name and its definition (cf. *Cat.* 1). The underlying rule bears a certain resemblance to one of Aristotle’s favourite examples of a ‘common premiss’ or ‘common starting-point’: ‘if equals are subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal’.

**107b6–12.** The test just given can be iterated: if the definitions as well as the words are the same, we may nevertheless ask whether the definitions of the terms in the definitions are the same. In order to show that X and Y are univocally F, we must show that X and Y are both called F, that the same definition of F applies to each, that the same definition of each term in the definition of F applies to each, etc. Thus, it appears that (verbal) sameness of definition is only a necessary, not a sufficient, condition for univocity.

The nature of Aristotle’s example is difficult to see unless we remember that he is still discussing the definitions of complexes. We need a case in which two things have both the same name and the same definition, but a definition containing something equivocal. Such a case can be provided if we suppose, with Alexander, that the complexes are ‘indicative of health’ (*sēmantikon hugieias*) and ‘productive of health’ (*poiētikon hugieias*). These both contain the words ‘of health’. Now, Aristotle considers definitions of these complexes which replace ‘of health’ in each case with ‘commensurately related to health’ (*summetrōs echon pros hugieian*): ‘commensurately related to producing health’ (*summetrōs echon pros to hugieian poiein*) ‘commensurately related to indicating health’ (*summetrōs echon pros to hugieian sēmainein*). (In Greek, the phrase ‘commensurately related to health’ remains intact in both cases.) If we then delete what is unique to each, we have left the same phrase, ‘commensurately related to health’, so that this passes the test just stated. However, Aristotle notes that ‘commensurately related’ has different meanings in the two cases.

Just what are these two meanings? Aristotle may have either, or both, of two things in mind. First, the two senses may involve different categories. What is productive of health is ‘of such an amount’ as to produce health (and thus a quantity), whereas what is indicative is ‘of such a sort’, i.e. a quality. Second, he appears to be saying that what is productive of health tends to produce *good* health, whereas what is indicative of health indicates *what state* one’s health is in, whether good or bad. There may be more in this example than at first appears. Aristotle makes much in the *Metaphysics* of things which are neither strictly equivocal nor strictly univocal but rather designated ‘with reference to a single thing’, as all healthy things are called healthy neither in equivocal ways nor in the same way but in a way that always makes reference to health (see *Met.* $\Gamma$ 2). G. E. L. Owen (1960) argued that the recognition of such ‘*pros hen*’ equivocity in the *Metaphysics* represents a kind of partial recantation on Aristotle’s part of an earlier position. Owen held that in the logical treatises, Aristotle is hostile to Plato’s conception of a ‘mistress-science’ embracing all other sciences and taking all reality for its object; part of the argument against such a science, on Owen’s view, is the claim that ‘being’ does not designate any single genus of things but instead has a different sense for each category. However, Owen argued, in the *Metaphysics* Aristotle retreated from this view and argued that *pros hen* homonymy could give a rational basis for a science of being as a science of substance. Many scholars today dispute Owen’s claim that there is any real inconsistency between the *Metaphysics* and ‘earlier’ works on this point (see Code 1986). In any event, the present text does not seem to me likely to settle the issue. Even though Aristotle’s examples are similar to those used in *Met.* $\Gamma$ 2 to illustrate *pros hen* homonymy, there is no reason why he should mention this type of ambiguity here: *pros hen* homonymy is still a form of homonymy, whatever its metaphysical importance.

**107b13–18.** The test proposed is straightforward: things to which an expression applies univocally can be meaningfully compared with respect to the degree to which it applies to them. Since, therefore, it makes no sense to ask whether this sharp taste is as sharp as this sharp sound, the taste and the sound are equivocally sharp.

Note here that this is a brief appearance of the third major element in the *Topics* system of classifying arguments: ‘more and less and likewise’ (see the Introduction).