# Aristotle: Topics

## BOOK ONE

### CHAPTER I

**100a** The goal of this study is to find a method with which we shall be able to construct deductions from acceptable premisses concerning any problem that is proposed and—when submitting to argument ourselves—will not say anything inconsistent. First, then, we must say what a deduction is and what its different varieties are, so that the dialectical deduction may be grasped (for that is the one we seek in the present study).

**25** A deduction, then, is an argument in which, certain things being supposed, something different from the suppositions results of necessity through them. It is a *demonstration* if the deduction is from things which either are themselves true and primary or have attained the starting-point of knowledge about themselves through **30** some primary and true premisses. A *dialectical* deduction, on the other hand, is one which deduces from what is acceptable.

**100b** Those things are *true and primary* which get their trustworthiness through themselves rather than through other things (for when it comes to scientific starting-points, one should not search **20** further for the reason why, but instead each of the starting-points ought to be trustworthy in and of itself). Those are *acceptable*, on the other hand, which seem so to everyone, or to most people, or to the wise—to all of them, or to most, or to the most famous and esteemed.

A *contentious* deduction is one from what appears to be acceptable but is not, or an apparent deduction from what is actually or **25** only apparently acceptable. For not everything which appears to be acceptable actually is so: for none of the acceptable things mentioned has this appearance purely on its surface, as actually *does* happen in connection with the starting-points of contentious arguments (for in their case, the nature of the mistake is usually quite **30** obvious at once to those capable of even modest discernment). Let **101a** us say, then, that the first of the contentious deductions mentioned really is a deduction but that the remaining one is a contentious deduction, not a deduction, since it appears to deduce but does not do so.

**5** Next, apart from all the deductions that have been mentioned, there are the fallacies based on what is appropriate to specific sciences, as we find in the case of geometry and its kindred sciences. For this type does seem to be different from the deductions mentioned; for the person who draws fake diagrams does not deduce **10** from true and primary things, nor from acceptable ones either (for they do not fall within the definition: he does not take what everyone thinks, or most people, or the wise—not all, nor most, nor the most esteemed of them). Instead, he makes his deduction from premisses which are appropriate to the science but not true: for he **15** fakes a diagram by describing semicircles improperly, or by extending certain lines in ways in which they cannot be extended.

So then, we may let the aforementioned be the species of deductions, for the purpose of capturing them in an outline. And as a general comment on all we have said or are going to say later, we **20** may let this be the extent to which we make our distinctions, inasmuch as it is not our intent to give the exact account of any of them; what we want to do instead is develop the account as far as an outline, since we deem it fully sufficient, for the purposes of the present method, to be able to recognize each of them in some way or other.

# COMMENTARY

## BOOK ONE

### CHAPTER I

**100a18–21.** The *Topics* is a practical treatise: from the beginning, Aristotle tells us that his purpose is to find a ‘method’ (*methodos*) that will give us a certain capacity. Only the *Rhetoric* and *On Sophistical Refutations* (which is really an appendix to the *Topics*) are comparably oriented towards a practical goal, and neither takes such pains to stress the point. Despite this practical orientation, however, Aristotle’s distinctive concerns with theoretical understanding and classification soon manifest themselves. Much of the treatise (especially Book VIII) is concerned with a very specific kind of ‘gymnastic’ argumentation which appears to have been Aristotle’s inheritance rather than his invention. He also received from tradition a substantial vocabulary of technical terms and a significant armory of strategies concerning this practice. However, he continually subjects this inheritance to reworking and revision, sometimes drastic; as in the *Rhetoric*, Aristotle takes what may have been a skill defined by rules of thumb and practical maxims and undertakes to transform it into an art based on a scientific understanding of its subject-matter. Thus, when he proposes as his project the finding of a ‘method’ which will enable us to construct deductions about ‘any problem that is proposed’, he is (as it seems to me) making a deliberately grandiose claim, not dissimilar in scope to the vast sweep he sees for the procedures of the *Prior Analytics* in that work (I. 30).

This opening sentence is thick with technical vocabulary. Aristotle defines several of the most important terms later, but a few explanations may be useful here:

‘Study’: the word is *pragmateia*, which (like ‘study’) can mean both the activity of investigating a subject and a written work giving the results of such an investigation.

‘Method’ (*methodos*): our word ‘method’ not only descends from this term but also translates it well, with certain caveats. *Methodos* is derived from *hodos*, ‘road’: by its etymology it could mean ‘following on the road after’, ‘pursuit’, though this sense does not seem to appear until well after Aristotle. He most commonly uses it interchangeably with *pragmateia* to mean both a subject studied and a written account of such a study. A broadly similar pair of meanings exists in English: a ‘piano method’ is both a series of lessons teaching one to play the piano and a set of books containing those lessons.

‘Deduce’ (*sullogizesthai*), ‘deduction’ (*sullogismos*): these are the ancestors of our words ‘syllogize’, ‘syllogism’, but those descendants make bad translations. The problem is this: although Aristotle defines a *sullogismos* both here and elsewhere in rather general terms to mean, approximately, ‘valid argument’, he also tries to establish (in the *Prior Analytics*) that every valid argument can be analysed into one of a certain number of forms, or perhaps a combination of those forms: these forms are today referred to as ‘categorical syllogisms’, or simply ‘syllogisms’ (Aristotle himself usually calls these ‘the deductions in the figures’). Thus, to use this as a translation is seriously misleading, since the English term usually suggests this narrower meaning (it also has the unfortunate result, in connection with the *Prior Analytics*, of trivializing Aristotle’s claim, argued for at great length, that every valid argument can be ‘reduced’ to a syllogism). Note that in the argumentative context presupposed by the *Topics*, a *sullogismos* is normally a deduction of the contradictory of one’s opponent’s position, or a deduction of an outright self-contradiction from one’s opponent’s premisses, in each case put together by asking questions.

‘Acceptable’ (*endoxos*): translation of this term has been the subject of much scholarly controversy. As I interpret it, it is in fact a relative term: a proposition is *endoxos* with respect to some definite group of persons, whether it be the public generally, or the community of experts, or some-one famous. Aristotle discusses it more a few lines later.

‘Submit to argument’ (*hupechein logon*) is what the person who answers questions in a dialectical exchange is said to do. Translators differ as to what further sense to give it: ‘putting forward an argument’, ‘sustaining an argument’. But like many of Aristotle’s terms concerning argument, this one had an established use in law, where it generally meant having to undergo something (a penalty, a trial, a requirement of giving an account). In VIII. 4 we read that the questioner’s goal is to ‘appear to do something to’ the answerer, while the answerer’s goal is to ‘appear not to suffer anything’ (159a30–2). Thus, to ‘submit to argument’ is to allow oneself to be put to a kind of test.

‘Inconsistent’ (*hupenantion*). This often indicates points of conflict in a group of statements of opinion, e.g. apparent inconsistencies in Homer (*Poet.* 1461b3, etc.) or contradictions among the opinions held by other philosophers on a subject (*De An.* 409b22, *De Cael.* 280a6, *GA* 718a36, *GC* 323a26). In the latter sense, it is virtually the same as *aporema*, ‘puzzle’. Some translators suppose *hupenantion* to mean ‘self-contradictory’, but this seems to me inaccurate on two points. First, Aristotle is probably thinking more of a conclusion that is inconsistent with some previously conceded premiss than of a self-contradictory conclusion. Second, as other contexts show, answerers should be worried about intrinsically absurd or implausible conclusions as well as about internal consistency.

According to VIII. 4, the questioner’s goal in an exchange is to force out of the answerer the most implausible consequences that can be derived from the answerer’s chosen thesis; the answerer’s goal is not so much to avoid these consequences as to make it clear that they are the result of the thesis and not his handling of the argument. We do not find that distinction present here. Aristotle may therefore be thinking of the *general* aim of anyone acting as answerer in any sort of dialectical exchange, not just a formal bout of gymnastic dialectic. For that wider context, a dialectical art should teach how to avoid being forced into accepting conclusions that are inconsistent either with one’s expressed opinions or with what is generally accepted.

‘Different varieties’: Aristotle actually says ‘differences’ (*diaphorai*), but this term also has the technical sense ‘differentia’. The sense is ‘what the differences of the various species of deductions are’.

**100a25–101a4.** The most important of Aristotle’s logical notions is that of the deduction (*sullogismos*). His definition here, like the virtually identical one in the *Prior Analytics* (24b18–20), comes close to embracing any sort of valid argument (see also *SE* 164b27–165a2, 168a21–2; *Rhet.* 1356b16–18), though it probably differs in some points from standard modern logical usage. To begin with, Aristotle specifies that ‘what results’ must be different from any of the premisses; thus, ‘p; q; therefore, p’ would fail to be a deduction. The Greek commentators also say that the plural *tethenton* (‘certain things being supposed’) rules out deductions with a single premiss. That may be Aristotle’s meaning: he says that nothing ‘results of necessity’ from a single premiss (*An. Pr.* I. 23, 40b35–6; II. 2, 53b16–20). On the other hand, the *Prior Analytics* makes important use of conversion inferences (e.g. inferring ‘No B is an A’ from ‘No A is a B’), and these appear to be single-premiss arguments. More significantly here, many of the inference-patterns found in *Top.* II–VII can plausibly be construed as one-premiss arguments (see Introduction). *Top.* I. 12 recognizes only two kinds of dialectical *arguments*, namely, deductions and inductions; Aristotle has no separate term for ‘valid arguments that are not *sullogismoi*’.

‘Supposed’ (*tethenton*, *keimenon*): Aristotle commonly uses the verbs *tithenai* (‘put’) and *keisthai* (which functions as the perfect passive of *tithenai*) of the premisses of arguments. Perhaps the most accurate account of their meaning here is ‘taken as premisses of an argument’ or ‘considered in order to see what follows of necessity from them’, despite its appearance of circularity. It is not easy to give a better explanation without explaining what logical consequence is, that is, without propounding a philosophy of logic. In the context of the *Topics*, *tithenai* most often is used of the answerer in a dialectical exchange, with the meaning ‘concede’ (i.e. ‘reply affirmatively to a premiss advanced by the questioner’). At least for a dialectical deduction, then, we might gloss ‘supposed’ with ‘conceded’. However, it is an important insight of Aristotle’s that whether the conclusion of an argument follows of necessity from its premisses does not depend on the form in which the argument is presented or the use to which it is being put (see *An. Pr.* I. 1).

‘Results of necessity through them’: this is Aristotle’s characteristic way of expressing the relation of logical consequence. The first step for any student in logic is to understand the difference between ‘X is necessary’ and ‘X is a necessary consequence of Y’: the latter neither asserts Y nor asserts that X is necessary. The phrase ‘through them’ may serve to restrict the definition to arguments in which the conclusion follows from the premisses *alone*, i.e. arguments in which nothing else is tacitly presupposed (modern usage sometimes calls such arguments ‘enthymemes’). (There may be an explicit recognition of this in the remark in *An. Pr.* I. 32 (47a33–5) that ‘the necessary is more extensive than the *sullogismos*’.)

**100a27–b23.** Aristotle now gives brief discussions of three species of arguments: demonstration (*apodeixis*), dialectical deduction (*sullogismos dialektikos*), and contentious deduction (*eristikos sullogismos*). Demonstrations are discussed at great length in the *Posterior Analytics*, while contentious deductions are the subject of *On Sophistical Refutations* (which is an appendix to the *Topics*). It is tempting to say that a demonstration is a deduction which makes its conclusion known by deducing it from known (and therefore true) premisses; likewise, it is tempting to gloss ‘contentious’ with ‘fallacious’. Aristotle’s actual characterizations, however, are somewhat more complex. Before considering them, it will be useful to take note of some basic points about arguments and their premisses.

First, there is a connection between validity and truth. If a valid argument has true premisses, then its conclusion must also be true. This connection may be seen as definitional: on most accounts, what it means to say that an argument is valid is that it cannot have true premisses and a false conclusion (thus, whatever follows from true premisses is true). We may call this the *semantic* picture of validity.

Arguments also have a *doxastic* dimension, however, and are frequently offered as vehicles of persuasion. If an argument is to persuade, it must make an appeal of this form: ‘You accept these premisses; therefore, you must accept this conclusion’. In such a case, what is important is not the truth of the premisses—at least not directly—but the fact that they are believed. Likewise, the persuasiveness of an argument turns on whether its audience believes its conclusion to follow from its premisses, not whether it actually does follow. False premisses which I believe will be useful in persuading me; true ones I do not believe will not. Similarly, premisses will be useful in getting me to believe a conclusion only if I *believe* that conclusion follows from them. Put briefly: whatever is (believed to be) deduced from believed premisses is believed.

This last generalization says something about how we behave as epistemic subjects, for obviously it must be relative to a particular believer. We often have false beliefs, including false beliefs about what follows from what, and we may think that an argument is valid when it is not. If we consider inferences just as dispositions to assent to certain conclusions after having assented to certain premisses, then perhaps the study of persuasive arguments is ultimately a matter for psychology. However, inferential beliefs are not—or at least need not be—mere blind dispositions to behave. Instead, they presuppose a connection with truth, specifically, the *belief* that if the premisses are true then the conclusion must be true. Validity, semantically defined, is thus what we aim at in our inferential beliefs, and it serves as their normative goal. If an argument is valid, then a disposition to infer its conclusion from its premisses is *rational*; if an argument is invalid, then the analogous disposition is irrational. If we discover that we have dispositions to infer conclusions from premisses which do not really necessitate them, then in order to be rational we must change those dispositions.

This leads to an important connection between deduction and knowledge. Whatever else philosophers might wish to say about knowledge, most have taken it as obvious that what is known must be both true and believed. The fact that truth and belief are both transmitted by valid arguments thus makes validity especially relevant to knowledge: the argument’s validity and the truth of its premisses imply the truth of its conclusion, while my beliefs that the premisses are true and that the argument is valid lead to my belief that the conclusion is true. In brief: whatever is known to follow from known premisses is known. An argument which functions in this way, leading to knowledge of its conclusion on the basis of knowledge of its premisses, is a *proof* or *justification*.

In the *Posterior Analytics* Aristotle says that a demonstration is a deduction such that ‘we have knowledge in virtue of possessing it’ (71b18–19). *An. Post.* I proceeds to discuss in detail the structure of this type of knowledge (for which Aristotle reserves the term *episteme*). He enumerates some six properties which the premisses of a deduction must have if it is to be a demonstration: they must be true, ‘primary’, ‘immediate’ (*amesoi*), prior to the conclusion, ‘better known’ than the conclusion, and the cause or explanation of the conclusion’s truth. These properties (to which *An. Post.* I. 4 adds necessity) will ensure that the demonstration is a ‘deduction producing scientific knowledge’, which Aristotle explains as a matter of knowing the cause why the conclusion must be as it is. From this definition, Aristotle then argues that the ‘starting-points’ (*archai*) on which demonstrations depend must have other properties. In particular, they must themselves be incapable of demonstration and, since Aristotle identifies scientific knowledge (*episteme*) with knowledge that results from demonstration, they must be known in some other way that provides even more ‘trustworthiness’ or ‘conviction’ (*pistis*) than demonstration (*An. Post.* I. 2, 72a25–b4). An Aristotelian demonstration, then, is a proof of a special sort, from premisses meeting a series of additional conditions.

*Top.* 100a27–9 does reflect some of this: the phrase ‘true and primary’ corresponds exactly to *An. Post.* I. 2, and Aristotle’s later explanation of the phrase in 100a30–b21 not only attributes an inherent trustworthiness (*pistis*) to what is true and primary but also calls such premisses ‘starting-points’ (*archai*). We might try to see more by taking the remark that one ‘should not seek further the reason why’ in connection with these starting-points as an allusion to the causal role of demonstrative premisses in the *Posterior Analytics*. However, what the *Topics* says is not that the starting-points must be *causes*, but rather that one must not seek their *causes*.

What is the meaning of the statement that true and primary propositions ‘get their trustworthiness through themselves’? In the *Posterior Analytics* Aristotle holds that demonstrations must rest on undemonstrated first premisses (or otherwise there is an infinite regress of premisses, with no beginning). However, he stops short of saying that these first premisses must be self-evident or obvious in some way that transcends proof. The term I translate ‘trustworthiness’ is *pistis*, which can mean ‘trust’ (of persons), ‘belief’, or ‘conviction’ (of propositions). It is possible that Aristotle uses it to indicate some intrinsic epistemic quality of first premisses, for instance a kind of indubitability. However, in rhetoric and in forensic oratory *pistis* had the semi-technical sense ‘proof’, i.e. argument or evidence used to prove something (*Rhet.* 1354a13, elsewhere). Aristotle also uses the phrase *lambanein pistin* to mean ‘obtain a proof’ (frequently in *De Cael.* 279b33, 277b9, 283b30, 287a31; *Met.* 1090a3; *Mete.* 372a32). If that is the sense Aristotle has in mind, then he may mean that the premisses of demonstrations constitute, on their own, proofs or evidence for *other* propositions.

There is another interpretation worth considering. Aristotle frequently differentiates demonstration and dialectical argument on the grounds that demonstrations ‘take’ their premisses whereas dialectical deductions ‘ask’ them (see e.g. *An. Pr.* I. 1 and the Commentary on 101b28–36 below). This difference of form reflects a difference in purpose. Demonstrations take their premisses as established and seek to establish their conclusion from them, whereas dialectical arguments treat them merely as hypothetical and seek to explore what follows from them. Aristotle’s point, then, may be just this: ‘Unlike a dialectical deduction, a demonstration must take its premisses as established; therefore, they must actually be established, either on their own merit or through some other kind of proof.’

Since the main subject of the *Topics* is dialectical argument, not demonstration, it is probably unwise to press comparisons on this point with the *Posterior Analytics* too far.

**100a30–b19.** ‘have attained [*eilephen*: perfect] the starting-point of knowledge about themselves through some primary and true premisses’: most interpreters take this to mean ‘have previously been demonstrated’. Such an interpretation comports well with the deductive structure presented in Euclid’s *Elements* and in the precursors of it which may have existed as early as Aristotle’s time in the Academy: a science proves its theorems in systematic order, first establishing the simplest theorems and then using them as premisses from which to prove more complex ones. (But it is curious that Aristotle takes little if any note of this structure in the *Posterior Analytics*, speaking instead as if every demonstration must rely on indemonstrable starting-points.) Note that it is the *premisses* of the demonstration which are said to have ‘attained the starting-point of knowledge about themselves’. This may reflect a conception of a demonstration as providing a foundation for its conclusion by linking that conclusion up with its explanatory principles: it is the conclusion demonstrated which ‘reaches’ these starting-points, and the demonstration is the means through which it does this. (The perfect *eilephen* could indicate having entered into, and remained in, a certain state: as a result of prior demonstration, these premisses join the ranks of the permanently established.)

**100b23–5.** In effect, Aristotle defines a contentious deduction as a counterfeit dialectical deduction, that is, something which appears to be a dialectical deduction but is not. Such a counterfeit can take two forms: either a deduction with merely apparently acceptable premisses or a merely apparent deduction with acceptable premisses. (Of course, a single contentious deduction might exhibit both vices.) As Aristotle notes, the first sort of contentious deduction is a species of deduction, whereas the second sort is not, just as fake pearls are not pearls. In modern terminology, contentious deductions of the second sort are *invalid*. There is no standard modern term describing the vice of the first sort of contentious deduction, but we might see an analogy with those that are valid but *unsound* (i.e. have at least one false premiss). In each case, the vice in question is not a mere lack but an actual counterfeit, deceptively passing for its corresponding virtue.

What is it about contentious arguments that brings about these deceptive appearances? In most cases, it will be a matter of their form. Generally, we recognize valid arguments to be valid by recognizing them to be instances of forms which are valid, that is, which can never be instantiated by true premisses and a false conclusion. However, there are forms of argument which people are often inclined to think valid even though they are not. We usually call these *fallacies*. A contentious argument of the second sort is a fallacy put to a certain deceptive use: the contentious reasoner propounding it will generally know it is invalid, but his victim will not.

The first question to arise about contentious arguments of the first sort, genuine deductions with merely apparently acceptable premisses, is: what is it for a premiss to be *only apparently* acceptable? As we learn in the next sentence, it is again form that causes the misleading appearance.

**100b26–101a1.** ‘not everything which appears to be acceptable’: these lines, which have proved difficult for interpreters, shed light on the notion of an apparently acceptable premiss, but they do so rather indirectly. The reason, as so often in the *Topics*, is that Aristotle was writing for an audience already familiar with dialectical practices and terminology, not for us. Aristotle’s contemporaries were familiar with a whole collection of argumentative puzzles (such as those displayed in Plato’s *Euthydemus*) which often turn on getting people to accept trick premisses. Many of these are such that, once the trick has been sprung, it is obvious how it works and equally obvious that the initial premiss should not have been conceded. Consider an example: ‘What you have not lost, you have; you have not lost horns; therefore, you have horns.’ The problem with this argument is not that it is invalid but that its first premiss is false. To be caught by the trick, I must first concede this premiss, which I might do because it has a certain superficial plausibility; on reflection (or after seeing what follows from it), I realize that I do not believe it after all, even though at first I thought I did.

Of course, once I have caught on to the trick, the offending premiss no longer even *appears* to me to be something I accept. Thus, what appears to be acceptable is not only relative to a particular person but also subject to modification. This gives rise to a problem. On any plausible view of acceptability, what is *actually* acceptable could well change in the same way: the wise, and even the many, gradually change their views in the light of experience, fashion, or other influences. Especially for those who engage in dialectical argument, one of those influences can be the discovery that some belief leads to absurdity or contradiction. If, for instance, I am thoroughly persuaded by Zeno’s arguments concerning motion, then I will decide that, though I at first inclined to accept the proposition ‘There is motion’, I now realize that I do not accept it at all. A contentious argument could bring about a change in what I accept in just the same way: the only difference is in how quickly I come to make the required adjustment. To put the point another way, what counts as a contentious argument for the quick-witted might constitute genuine dialectical inquiry for the obtuse. We are thus left without a clear distinction between the dialectical and the contentious.

Aristotle might try to solve this by appealing to another distinction. Contentious argument, as he thinks of it, is *deceptive*. Those who lie differ from those who are sincerely mistaken in that they believe what they say is false; likewise, those who argue contentiously give arguments which they realize are flawed. But this again implies that one and the same argument might be contentious or dialectical, depending on the logical insight of its propounder.

Aristotle does not take note of these issues here because his purpose is to discuss dialectical rather than contentious arguments: he reserves the latter for a more extensive treatment in *On Sophistical Refutations* (see in particular *SE* 8, *SE* 10).

**101a5–17.** This passage takes note of a problem in Aristotle’s classification of arguments. The word I translate ‘fallacy’ (*paralogismos*) carries an implication of deliberate trickery which ‘fallacy’ does not: its cognate verb *paralogizesthai* commonly means ‘cheat’ or ‘embezzle’ (though Aristotle does occasionally use it of people who have simply made errors in reasoning, e.g. Melissus and Zeno in *Phys.* I. 3). In *On Sophistical Refutations*, fallacies are contentious deductions of the second variety as defined above: invalid arguments that appear to be valid.

Now, Aristotle sees a problem with a particular variety of deceptive reasoning that he describes as ‘based on [*ek*, which often indicates the premisses of an argument] what is appropriate to specific sciences’. His illustration is highly specific. A geometrical proof, for the Greeks, was usually closely connected with a diagram, so much so that *graphein*, ‘draw’, can mean simply ‘prove’ (i.e. by drawing a diagram). A trick ‘proof’ for some impossible result can sometimes be constructed by drawing a diagram which is actually impossible, e.g. represents certain lines as intersecting which cannot actually intersect, or cannot intersect as represented (it may help to draw many irrelevant lines so as to make it harder to see what is going on: cf. VIII. 1, 157a1–5). The propounder of such a puzzle is a ‘false-drawer’ or ‘fake-diagrammer’ (*pseudographos*). We meet with these characters a few times in the *Topics*, and in *SE* 11 (see Excerpt C), but nowhere else in Aristotle, and there is scarcely any mention of them in other sources except Aristotle’s commentators. It is therefore impossible to say with certainty who these ‘false-drawers’ were and what the purpose of their activity might have been—geometers devising puzzles to discomfit their colleagues? Philosophers trying to undermine the pretences of geometry? Mere puzzle-mongers?

For Aristotle, the problem is that, unlike contentious reasoners, these people actually use geometrical principles in their puzzles. This means that their arguments only work within the sphere of geometry, and indeed only for people with at least some geometrical knowledge. Now Aristotle is often at pains to emphasize the complete generality of application of dialectical and contentious argumentation to any subject matter (cf. *SE* 11), and he also holds that for this reason both skills are content-free or topic-neutral: I do not have to know anything at all about a science in order to produce dialectical arguments concerning it. But fake-diagrammers seem instead to rely on the very science they try to undermine.

After raising the question where these arguments fit in his classification, Aristotle does not answer it. For a more complete statement of his view, we must turn to *On Sophistical Refutations*, the principal subject of which is contentious arguments. There, we find Aristotle taking great pains to explain why the *pseudographos* is not a contentious reasoner: see *SE* 9 and *SE* 11 for more on the relationships among the *pseudographos*, the contentious reasoner, and the dialectician.

**101a18–24.** ‘capturing them in an outline’: ‘outline’ (*tupos*) refers to images stamped on coins or engraved on gems. Such pictures have just enough detail to permit one to recognize their originals; in the same way, Aristotle explains, his present sketch is only supposed to be a superficial one, with just enough detail to permit the user of his method to *recognize* the various types of deduction. The ‘exact account’ (*akribes logos*) concerning any subject would be a scientific study that offered causes and explanations. Aristotle explicitly says that he is *not* aiming at an explanatory account of deductions and is only providing a sort of field-guide that will enable its users to classify arguments for practical purposes. This has important consequences for our interpretation of the various definitions in the *Topics*: we cannot assume that Aristotle would regard any of them as truly explanatory. But neither should we take him to mean that the ‘outline’ account is in any way false: a ‘definition’ intended to aid in recognizing a thing and a scientific definition intended to capture its essence serve different purposes and may in consequence require different formulations.

In the case of demonstrations, the present ‘outline’ only says enough to indicate how dialectical arguments differ from them; the ‘exact account’ of this species of argument is to be found in the *Posterior Analytics*. The other species of deduction Aristotle mentions, apart from the dialectical deductions which are his present subject, are contentious arguments and the class of technical fallacies, each of which is discussed in *On Sophistical Refutations*. Since Aristotle’s references elsewhere to it make it clear that he thought of this as part of the *Topics* and not a separate treatise, some scholars conclude that *On Sophistical Refutations* is a later appendix to the *Topics* and not part of its original conception.

There is another sort of ‘exact account’ of deductions in general in the *Prior Analytics*. Though Aristotle clearly asserts that this theory applies to all arguments, dialectical as well as demonstrative (see *An. Pr.* II. 23, 68b8–14), the *Topics* shows no awareness of it. This has been taken as evidence that the *Topics* antedates the theories in the *Analytics*; but even if that is the case, we would still need to ask why Aristotle did not care to revise the *Topics* in the light of his later theory. It seems to me that the practical orientation of the *Topics* would be a sufficient explanation for Aristotle’s silence about his theory of inference, whether or not it postdates the *Topics*: the art of dialectic is a practical art, whereas the contents of *An. Pr.* I are ill adapted to the practical business of discovering arguments. It is no more to be expected that he should include a discussion of his theory of validity in such a practical manual than that a modern logician should feel compelled to give a full account of first-order theory in a textbook of informal logic.