### CHAPTER 2

**101a** **25** Next in order after what we have said would be to state the number and kinds of things our study is useful for. There are, then, three of these: exercise, encounters, and the philosophical sciences. Now, that it is useful in relation to exercise is obvious at once, for if we have a method we shall be able more easily to attack whatever is **30** proposed. And it is useful in relation to encounters because, once we have reckoned up the opinions of the public, we shall speak to them, not from the beliefs of others, but from their own beliefs, changing their minds about anything they may seem to us not to have stated well. It is useful in relation to the philosophical sciences **35** because if we have the ability to go through the difficulties on either side we shall more readily discern the true as well as the false in any subject.

Furthermore, it is useful in connection with the first of the starting-points about any individual science. For if we reason from the starting-points appropriate to the science in question, it is impossible to make any statement about these (since these starting-points **101b** are the first of them all), and it is by means of what is acceptable about each that it is necessary to discuss them. But this is unique, or at any rate most appropriate, to dialectic: for since its ability to examine applies to the starting-points of all studies, it has a way to proceed.

### CHAPTER 3

**101b** **5** We shall have a complete grasp of our method when we are in the same condition as in the case of rhetoric, medicine, and other such abilities. [And that is: to do what we choose with what is available.] For the rhetorician will not convince under all circumstances, nor the physician heal; however, if he leaves out nothing that is possible, **10** then we shall say that he has a sufficient grasp of his craft.


# COMMENTARY

### CHAPTER 2

**101a25–7.** ‘Exercise’ (*gumnasia*): not some general sort of ‘mental exercise’ for the sharpening of wits, but debating contests of a specific type (the details emerge in Book VIII). To ‘attack’ (*epicheirein*: literally, ‘lay hands on’) is, in the technical vocabulary of dialectical disputation, to take the role of the questioner. Since the attacker aims at deducing something unacceptable from the respondent’s answers, ‘deduce’ sometimes has a similar sense (cf. the first sentence of the treatise). On the roles of attacker and defender, see VIII. 3–5.

It is less clear what an ‘encounter’ (*enteuxis*) is. Some interpreters suppose these to be exchanges, perhaps under more or less formal conditions, with those ‘from outside’, i.e. (on the assumption that the *Topics* is a manual for Academy members) from outside the Academy; others translate ‘casual encounters’. But *Rhet.* I. 1, 1355a27–9, which appears to refer to this passage, mentions ‘encounters with the public’ (*he pros tous pollous enteuxis*). The point Aristotle is making is that his dialectical art is *also* useful for more general argumentative situations in which the formal rules of ‘gymnastic’ disputation do not apply.

‘Changing their minds’ (*metabibazontes*): Aristotle has in mind the correction, or conversion, of others’ opinions, not ‘shifting the ground’ in an argument so as to defeat one’s opponent. Compare VIII. 11, 161a29–36, and *EE* I. 6, 1216b28–35: the latter makes clear the role of this in leading others to philosophical understanding, claiming that we all have some understanding of the truth, on which philosophical education builds.

The ‘philosophical sciences’ are those pursued for the sake of understanding rather than for a practical end. Aristotle claims that his dialectical method can contribute to the discovery of truth as well as to the winning of arguments. To ‘go through the difficulties’ (*diaporein*) is to give a survey of the problems which need to be solved in an area of inquiry: Aristotle’s treatises frequently begin with such *diaporiai*, which summarize the views of his predecessors and attempt to set the stage for his own position as a resolution of those difficulties.

**101a36–b4.** This second ‘philosophical’ value is quite different from the preceding three. Several interpreters have seen in this section an adumbration of a much more important use for dialectic, namely, as the fundamental method of philosophical inquiry (see Irwin 1988). Though Aristotle argues that the first premisses of demonstrations must be themselves known without demonstration, many interpreters find the account of the cognition of these first principles in *An. Post.* II. 19 to be very unsatisfactory (Irwin describes it as appealing to an empty ‘pseudo-performance’). This has motivated attempts to find a better account in the treatises. In an influential paper, G. E. L. Owen (1961) called attention to the similarities between the approaches Aristotle regularly takes in his scientific treatises, especially his surveys of the opinions of his predecessors and of the contradictions and puzzles which can be derived from them, and dialectical argument. These surveys, as well as collections of empirical data, give the ‘appearances’ (*phainomena*) from which scientific inquiry must begin. Those *phainomena* which consist of the opinions of others would seem to be very much like the *endoxa* of the *Topics*. Now, a celebrated passage in *EN* VII. 1 appears to indicate that *endoxa* play a crucial role in the establishment of scientific principles: ‘We must, as in all other cases, set the phenomena before us and, after first discussing the difficulties, go on to prove, if possible, the truth of all the reputable opinions (*endoxa*) about these affections or, failing this, of the greatest number and the most authoritative; for if we both resolve the difficulties and leave the reputable opinions (*endoxa*) undisturbed, we shall have proved the case sufficiently’ (1145b2–7, rev. Oxford tr.). From this evidence, some interpreters have concluded that Aristotle believed some form of dialectical argument could establish the first principles of sciences. Perhaps the most fully elaborated view of this sort is given by Irwin (1988), who proposes a developmental account: Aristotle had a largely negative picture of the powers of dialectic when he wrote the *Topics* and other logical works, but he later came to think that a refurbished kind of dialectical argument (‘strong dialectic’) could establish first principles and, indeed, was the proper method of philosophy.

In this connection, we should note also that Aristotle makes a distinction between the first principles ‘peculiar’ (*idios*) or ‘appropriate’ (*oikeios*) to an individual science and certain ‘common’ principles which apply to all sciences (his standard examples of the latter include the laws of excluded middle and non-contradiction). In the logical works and the *Rhetoric*, he often insists that these common principles (however we identify them) are not the principles of any science, and he does not seem to regard them as the objects of any kind of scientific or philosophical inquiry. In *Met.* B, however, Aristotle raises the question which science is to consider these common principles, and in *Met.* Γ he argues that they are studied by ‘first philosophy’. Owen (1960, 1961, 1968) and Irwin (1988) see this as an important break with the *Topics* (and the logical works generally): they suppose that in the *Metaphysics* Aristotle recants an earlier view of dialectic as merely a critical instrument and an earlier rejection of a universal science, now proposing a ‘science of being as such’ and a methodology for it that is in some way dialectical. The existence of such a break has also been vigorously denied; see Code 1986, Owens 1963; for criticisms of Irwin, see Hamlyn 1990, Bolton 1990, Smith 1993.

These two questions—whether the conception of first philosophy in the *Metaphysics* is a retraction of Aristotle’s views in the logical treatises, and whether the *Metaphysics* and other works introduce a strengthened kind of dialectical argument as their basic methodology—are too complex to treat here. However, I do not think that the present passage is strong evidence for a view of dialectic as that which establishes first principles.

Let us first note how this new use for dialectic differs from what was said earlier in **101a34–36**. Aristotle said there only that dialectic is useful for discovering what is true and false, not that it is useful for discovering which *starting-points* are true. The process of ‘going through the difficulties’ could lead to the simple rejection of many views, as for instance Aristotle rejects the views of Zeno on motion. The present passage, by contrast, does limit itself to starting-points or what is ‘first’. However, it says neither that dialectic establishes nor that it discovers these starting-points.

Now Aristotle clearly says that it is not possible to *demonstrate* the starting-points since they are the very things from which demonstrations begin. The phrase ‘from the starting-points appropriate to the science in question’, which is closely associated with demonstrations in the *Posterior Analytics*, makes this certain. However, it is far from clear that the rest of the passage is intended to offer some alternative to demonstration as the means of *establishing* the starting-points. What he says is that the only possible way of ‘discussing’ these starting-points is something especially appropriate to dialectic. The term I translate ‘discuss’ (*dielthein*) literally means ‘go through’; in his other treatises, Aristotle uses this word over and over, typically with the preposition *peri* (‘about’), to announce the beginning or ending of his treatment of some subject. Thus, Aristotle does not say merely that the starting-points cannot be demonstrated, but that by means of demonstration we cannot say *anything* about them (*adunaton eipein ti peri auton*). The alternative to having nothing to say is having something to say, and that could fall far short of establishing.

Furthermore, Aristotle’s claim for a special usefulness for dialectic in this connection appeals to its ‘critical’ or ‘testing’ (*exetastike*) capacity. This is an uncommon term in Aristotle; Socrates used its cognate verb *exetazein* for the ‘examinations’ of others through questioning which he took to be his philosophical purpose in life. Socrates’ goal was to make clear to others their own unrecognized ignorance, and he accomplished this by deducing consequences—usually contradictory ones—from their admissions. Similarly, examining views, including the views of earlier philosophers and the views of ordinary people, by exploring their consequences and looking for contradictions is an important part of Aristotle’s philosophical method. Moreover, he sometimes makes refutation an essential feature of dialectical arguments (e.g. *SE* 2, 165b3–4), and the connection with Socrates’ practice is made explicit in *SE* 34, 183b6–8. However, all that the present passage says is that such critical examinations are ‘useful’ in ‘discussing’ scientific starting-points, and that falls far short of claiming that dialectic either establishes or discovers those starting-points. Finally, given Aristotle’s repeated claims in the *Topics* and *On Sophistical Refutations* that dialectical argument cannot establish *anything*, it would be more than a little surprising for him to hold that it can establish what scientific demonstrations cannot.

**101b3–4.** I have construed this last sentence differently from other translators, who all take the central phrase ‘[to] the starting-points of all studies’ as modifying ‘way’: ‘since dialectic is [or has] an ability to examine, it has a way to the starting-points of all inquiries.’ But the logic of this is not very clear: why should a capacity to examine entail a power of getting to all starting-points? Instead, I take Aristotle to be making the more modest claim that since dialectical methods of examination can be applied to anything, including the starting-points of sciences, they provide us with a way of discussing them.

In a few places, Aristotle speaks of ‘making trial’ as a feature of dialectic or mentions an ‘art of making trial’ (*peirastike*): see VIII. 5, 159a25–36; VIII. 11, 161a24–8; *SE* 2, 165b4–7; *SE* 8, 169b23–9; *SE* 11 throughout, esp. 171b3–12, 172a21–b4; *SE* 34, 183a37–b6. Many of these passages seem to distinguish ‘peirastic’ from dialectic or to define ‘peirastic’ arguments as a distinct species of dialectical arguments, but sometimes ‘making trial’ appears to be a general function of dialectic. *Met.* Γ 2, 1004b25–6, says that dialectic has (or is) a power of ‘making trial’ about the things of which philosophy is ‘knowledgeable’ (*gnoristike*). The subject in question there is ‘first philosophy’, which applies in a way to whatever there is and studies the most general principles of all. This seems quite clearly to imply that dialectic does not amount to a science of the most general principles; Aristotle says this same thing quite explicitly in *SE* 11, where he is at pains to argue that the universal applicability of dialectic’s testing ability does not make it a universal science. (For a very different picture of peirastic argument, see Bolton 1990.)

### CHAPTER 3

**101b5–10.** I. 3 must be read as continuous with I. 4 if its point is to be understood (note the very close parallel between 101b10 ‘has a sufficient grasp of his craft’ and 101b13 ‘would have a sufficient grasp of our proposed subject’). Since Aristotle is about to expound an art of dialectic, he first wants to make it clear what the goal of that art is. Now one might initially think that dialectical skill would be an ability to deduce *any* desired conclusion from *any* available premisses. However, that would be like defining medical skill as the ability to heal anyone who is ill, or rhetorical skill as the ability to persuade anyone of anything: but such skills do not exist. Aristotle notes elsewhere that medicine, rhetoric, and kindred arts (the commentators call them *stochastikai*, ‘aiming’) do not, even if practised without error, always succeed: the doctor sometimes just cannot heal, for some patients are incurable, and the orator sometimes just cannot persuade, owing to the nature of the case. Likewise, some positions just cannot be successfully defended or attacked. Therefore, we cannot in these cases do *anything* we choose, and there is no art which provides this ability. The dialectical art should instead provide an ability to find the best argument available for a given conclusion and a given respondent. This is one point in which dialectic differs from sophistry: the sophist seeks only victory in argument, even if that requires fallacious arguments and deceptive premisses.

Given this interpretation, the phrase in brackets in 101b7 must be, as Brunschwig holds, an incompetent gloss added by a later editor.