### CHAPTER 12

**162a** **35** An argument is *obvious* in one sense (the most popular one) if it is brought to a conclusion in such a way that nothing further need be asked. In another way—and this type is most correctly so called—**162b** when the premisses obtained are those from which it is necessary for it to be deduced and it is concluded through conclusions. Next, if something extremely acceptable is missing.

An argument is called ‘false’ in four ways. One way is when it **5** appears to come to a conclusion though it does not do so (which is called a contentious deduction). Another way is when it comes to a conclusion but not one relevant to what was proposed (which hap-pens most to those leading to the impossible). Or, it comes to a conclusion relevant to what was proposed, but yet not in accord-ance with the appropriate study (and this is when it appears to be **10** medical though it is not medical, or geometrical though it is not geometrical, or dialectical though it is not dialectical), whether what follows is false or true. In another way, if it is concluded through falsehoods. The conclusion of such an argument will some-times be false but sometimes true: for a falsehood is always concluded through falsehoods, but it is possible for a truth to **15** be concluded even though not from truths, as was also stated earlier.

Now, for an argument to be false is a fault of the speaker more than of the argument—and it is not even a fault of the speaker in every case, but only when he is not aware of it—since, considering the argument just in itself, we approve it more than many true ones, if starting with premisses which seem so to the highest degree it **20** rejects some truth. For if the argument is of this sort, then it is a demonstration of other truths: for one of the premisses must not be so at all, so that it will be a demonstration of this. But if the argument were to conclude a truth through false, and extremely silly, premisses, it would be worse than many which deduce a **25** falsehood (and it might be like this even if it concluded a false-hood). Consequently, it is clear that the first point of examination of an argument on its own is whether it comes to a conclusion; the second is whether this is true or false; and the third is from what sorts of premisses. For if it is from false but acceptable premisses, it is a logical argument; if from true but unacceptable premisses, it is **30** a poor one; and if the premisses are both false and extremely unacceptable, then it is clear that it is a poor argument, either without qualification or in application to the subject.


### CHAPTER 13

**162b** **31** How it is that the questioner asks for the initial thing and for contraries has been explained in accordance with the truth in the *Analytics*; now, this should be explained in accordance with opinion.

**35** People appear to ask for the initial thing in five ways. The most obvious, and the first, is if someone asks for the very thing which needs to be proved. In the case of the statement itself, it is not easy to get by with this, but it is more likely in the case of synonyms and those cases in which a word and a phrase signify the same thing. **163a** The second is when someone needing to demonstrate a particular asks for a universal, e.g. trying to show that there is a single science of contraries, he claims the premiss that there is a single knowledge of opposites. For he appears to be asking for what he needed to prove by itself, together with other additional things. Third, if **5** someone proposing to prove a universal should ask for a particular, e.g. if, proposing to prove this about all contraries, he claims it about these certain contraries. For this person also appears to be asking for that which—with additional things—he needed to prove, apart by itself. Next, if someone divides up the problem in asking, e.g. if, needing to prove that medicine is of the healthy and the **10** diseased, he should claim each of them separately. Or, if someone should ask for one or the other of premisses which necessarily follow from each other, e.g. asking for the premiss that the side is incommensurable with the diagonal when it is required to demonstrate that the diagonal is incommensurable with the side.

People ask for contraries in the same number of ways as they do **15** the initial thing. First, if someone should ask for an opposed assertion and denial; second, contraries according to an opposition, e.g. <calling> the same thing good and evil; third, if someone who has claimed a universal should ask for its contradictory in the case of particulars (e.g. if, having obtained <the premiss> that there is a single knowledge of contraries, he were to claim that there is a different knowledge of the healthy and of the diseased; or if, having **20** asked for the latter, he should attempt to get the contradictory in the case of the universal); next, if someone should ask for the contrary to what results of necessity because of the things supposed; and if someone were not to obtain the opposites themselves but should ask for two <sets of> premisses such that from them the opposing contradiction arises.

**25** Getting contraries differs from getting the initial thing in that the error in the latter case is in relation to the conclusion (for that is what we look to in saying that someone asks for the initial thing), whereas in the case of contraries it is within the premisses, in virtue of their being in a certain relationship to one another.