### CHAPTER 12

**105a** **10** With these things defined, then, we need to distinguish how many kinds of dialectical argument there are. One kind is *induction*, another is *deduction*. Now, what a deduction is was explained earlier. Induction, however, is proceeding from particulars up to a universal. For instance, if the pilot who has knowledge is the best **15** pilot, and so with a charioteer, then generally the person who has knowledge about anything is the best. Induction is more persuasive, clearer, more intelligible in the way perception is, and commonly used by the public; deduction is more coercive and more effective with those skilled in contradicting.

### CHAPTER 13

**105a** **20** Let the classes of things which arguments are about and from be defined as we have said above. The tools by means of which we may be well equipped with deductions are four: one is obtaining premisses, the second is being able to distinguish how many ways a word is said, the third is finding differences, and the fourth is the **25** examination of likeness. In a way, the last three of these are also premisses, since it is possible to make a premiss about any of them, e.g. that either the noble, the pleasant, or the useful is choiceworthy; or, that perception differs from knowledge in that it is possible to get the one back after losing it, but this is impossible for **30** the other; or, that the healthful is in the same relationship to health as what part of a training program is to being in training. The first is a premiss about what is said in many ways, the second is a premiss about differences, and the third is a premiss about similar things.

#COMMENTARY

### CHAPTER 12

**105a10–19.** Induction (*epagōgē*) is the ancestor of the modern philosophi-cal notion (or notions) of inductive argument. As defined here, an induc-tion is an argument from many instances to a universal generalization. Broadly similar definitions are present or implicit in VIII. 1, **156a4–6**; *An. Post.* I. 1, 71a8–9; *Rhet.* I. 2, 1356b14–15 (see also below, I. 18, **108b10–11** and Commentary).

Aristotle often repeats the claim that all arguments are either inductive or deductive (*An. Pr.* II. 23, 68b13–14; *An. Post.* I. 1, 71a5–11; *Rhet.* I. 2, 1356a35–b4, II. 20, 1393a24–5; *EN* VI. 3, 1139b27–9). Elsewhere he hints at the same point by giving inductive and deductive arguments for the same point (a good example is I. 8 above). Given the connections between dialectic and Socrates, it is noteworthy that in *Met.* M 4, 1078b27–30, Aristotle credits Socrates with two advances in dialectic, one of which is inductive arguments. Aristotle often contrasts induction and deduction as moving in opposite directions: induction is from individuals to universals, deduction from universals. In the theory of demonstrative science, induc-tion plays an epistemic role as the source of knowledge of the first premisses of sciences which (Aristotle argues) cannot be known by deduc-tion from other principles. Thus, induction and deduction are the two sources of knowledge, as well as the two forms of argument.

In modern philosophical usage, an inductive argument is an argument from individual instances to a universal generalization:

$X_1$ is an A and an F
$X_2$ is an A and an F
...
$X_n$ is an A and an F
Therefore, every A is an F

The inference from any number of premisses of the form ‘X is an A and an F’ to the universal conclusion ‘Every A is an F’ is, formally speaking, invalid: the truth of the conclusion is not a *necessary* consequence of the premisses. However, such inferences are indispensable for empirical knowledge. A critical issue for the modern philosophy of science has therefore been just the problem of induction: what is the nature of the inference from a finite number of instances to a universal generalization, and when are such inductive arguments good ones (‘inductively valid’)?

From this modern viewpoint, what Aristotle has to say about induction is disappointing. Though he distinguishes between induction and deduc-tion, he does not really recognize a ‘problem’ of induction. Since he prac-tically defines ‘deduction’ as ‘argument in which the premisses necessitate the conclusion’, and since he says that inductions are not deductions, it would seem to follow that the conclusions of inductions are not necessi-tated by their premisses. But this is an interpreter’s conclusion, not one Aristotle draws. Moreover, some of his remarks about induction (notably the role he attributes to it in *An. Post.* II. 19) have sometimes been taken to imply that it is *more* secure in some way than deduction. A complicating factor is that Aristotle does not distinguish clearly between the type of inductive argument given above and a second type:

Every X is an F
Every Y is an F
Every Z is an F
X, Y, and Z are species of A
Therefore, every A is an F

In fact, the example in I. 12 is of this form. So understood, inductive arguments can easily be supplemented so as to make them deductively valid: we need only strengthen the last premiss to ‘X, Y, and Z are the *only* species of A.’ Aristotle proposes just this in *An. Pr.* II. 23.

A full discussion of Aristotle’s views concerning induction would take us even farther from the *Topics*. But if we confine ourselves to induction as a device in argumentative exchanges, then we could ask: under what circum-stances am I entitled to infer a general conclusion when my respondent has conceded a number of its instances? In Book VIII we get some indications of Aristotle’s answer to this question; see below, I. 15, **108b10–11**; VIII. 1, **156a3–7**; VIII. 2, **157a18–b33**; VIII. 5; and the associated Comments. For more of Aristotle’s views on induction see *An. Pr.* II. 23–4; *An. Post.* I. 1, I. 15, II. 19; *Rhet.* I. 2, 1356a25–b37; *EN* VI. 3, 1139b26–35.

**105a16–19.** Aristotle thinks inductive arguments are less sophisticated or less artful than deductions. Induction starts with what is perceptible to the senses, which is more intelligible or familiar ‘to us’ (that is, to people in general), and proceeds to universals, which are remote from sensation and less intelligible to us but more intelligible ‘by nature’ (that is, give the true explanations of the phenomena we perceive). In the order of acquisition of knowledge, then, induction is prior to deduction, and it is therefore more comprehensible to ordinary people unskilled in reasoning. Furthermore, on Aristotle’s account, all inductive arguments have essentially the same structure: instances followed by a generalization.

Deductions, by contrast, take many diverse forms, and it requires some skill not only to construct them but even to understand them. A complex deduction may be utterly lost on an unsophisticated audience, even though its conclusion is indeed necessitated by its premisses. Anyone who under-stands a deduction will understand the inescapability of its conclusion given its premisses; but in many cases only a few will understand. Not surprisingly, Aristotle has very much more to say about deductions than about inductions, both in the *Topics* and in the *Prior Analytics*.

Aristotle’s characterization of deductions as ‘more coercive’ than induc-tions is perhaps an acknowledgement that a good inductive argument may be deductively invalid, so that its premisses do not necessitate its conclu-sion. However, he does not actually say this, nor does he do so clearly elsewhere. He may mean something like this instead. As instances are adduced, it quickly becomes clear where an inductive argument is headed. Such arguments therefore are easier to follow, but for the same reason they require a certain amount of co-operative spirit: a recalcitrant adver-sary will be unlikely to grant the needed instances. Deductions, by con-trast, require fewer premisses and no goodwill on the part of the respondent in order to reach their conclusions, and thus they are more coercive. A good dialectician can deduce a conclusion from premisses conceded by an otherwise recalcitrant answerer. Refutations are coercive in just this way, forcing people to inconsistent admissions on the basis of their own concessions.

**105a17.** ‘more intelligible in the way perception is’: What we know through sense perception is more intelligible to us but less intelligible in itself; since induction is closely tied to sense perception, inductive argu-ments are also more intelligible to us, though they are incapable of pro-viding the understanding of causes required for science. This harmonizes with the remainder of the passage, which emphasizes the ordinary and common-sense character of inductive argument.

### CHAPTER 13

**105a21–33.** At I. 4, 101b11–13, Aristotle said that an adequate account of his dialectical ‘procedure’ would state ‘the number and kinds of things that arguments are about, and what they are made of, and how we are to be supplied with these’. He now turns to the last component of this, enumerating four ‘tools’ (*organa*) by means of which we are to be equipped with deductions. Of course, this means ‘equipped with deductions for any conclusion desired’. After enumerating these, Aristotle discusses each. The first, ‘obtaining premisses’ (*protaseis labein*), receives a detailed treatment in I. 14, and the second, ‘distinguishing the number of ways a word applies’, an even longer one in I. 15; the third and fourth, ‘finding differences’ and ‘the examination of likeness’, rate only cursory discussions (I. 16, I. 17). 

One thing missing from this list, and indeed not mentioned at all until the very last sentence of Book I, is the ‘locations’ or ‘places’ (*topoi*) which have given the *Topics* its name. Since these occupy by far the largest part of the treatise, commentators have been much exercised to fill in the gap left by Aristotle’s reticence and to answer the closely related question just what a *topos* is. My view is spelt out in the Introduction. Aristotle’s dialectical art is to be a procedure for finding premisses that meet two requirements: (i) they will be conceded by our opponent and (ii) they will imply the conclusion we want to establish. To meet (i), we need to know what sorts of things our opponent will accept, whereas to meet (ii), we need to know what follows from what. A solution to the problem would result if we had a double system for classifying propositions: first as lists of opinions of different sorts of people, next as possible premisses for deriving a given conclusion. Aristotle’s method, as I reconstruct it, rests on just such a system of classification. First, he tells us in I. 14 that we should compile lists of the opinions of various kinds of person. Next, in Books II–VI of the *Topics*, he gives us ‘locations’ (*topoi*) which consist of recipes for constructing arguments for various conclusions (Brunschwig characterizes a *topos* nicely as ‘a machine for making premisses beginning from any given conclusion’). To use the method, we first determine our conclusion (which is simply the denial of the answerer’s thesis). Then, using the collection of *topoi*, we find some premisses from which it would follow. Finally, we search for those premisses among the relevant collection of opinions. Once we have found them, all that remains is to present them to our opponent in an appropriate manner as questions (cf. VIII. 1, 155b4–7).

**105a23–4.** The second tool, being able to distinguish the different meanings of a word, includes two distinct abilities: being able to tell *whether* a word has different meanings and knowing *what* these meanings are. Aristotle devotes considerable attention to the second of these in other works: there are, for example, many alternative definitions for terms offered in the *Rhetoric*, and *Met.* $\Delta$ consists entirely of discussions of ‘how many ways’. No such discussion is contained in the *Topics*, however. What we find instead is a lengthy series of tests (in I. 15) for addressing the complementary question whether a word has multiple senses. Aristotle discusses what this tool is useful for in I. 18, 108a18–37. 

The phrase ‘how many ways something is said’ (*posachōs legetai*) is worth some attention in itself. One possible meaning of *legetai* (‘is said’) is the simple passive voice ‘is called’. In this sense, different *things* to which the same word applies may sometimes be *called the same thing in different ways*. Just this use appears, for example, in 106a4–5: justice and courage are *called good in one way*, the healthful and what produces fitness called good in another way. (As I interpret it, the same construction is found in 105a27–38: see below.) Here, the subject of *legetai* is the thing to which the word applies, not the word. In Aristotle, however, another use of *legetai* is also common: if A is predicated of B, then A is ‘said of’ (*legetai kata*) B. Here the subject of *legetai* is the word itself. Finally, the verb *legein* can mean ‘mean’ (having either person or utterance as its subject). These senses are interrelated. If X and Y are both called A—that is, if A is ‘said of’ them—but in different ways, then X and Y are called (A) in many ways (*pollachōs legetai*); therefore, since A is said of (*legetai* again) both X and Y but in different ways, the term A is said of (other things) in many ways (*pollachōs legetai*). The upshot is that *pollachōs legetai* is itself ‘said in many ways’, and in a way that it is difficult to capture in English translation. Most often in the *Topics* (for instance in I. 15), it is clearly a word that *pollachōs legetai*. I have therefore opted for the somewhat artificial ‘said in many ways’, with the intention of suggesting that Aristotle’s expression may also be some-what artificial. In some places, however, syntax requires me to resort to ‘is called’.

**105a24.** ‘finding differences’: although I have generally translated *diaphora* as ‘differentia’, the less technical ‘difference’ fits better with what Aristotle says later in I. 16 and I. 18 (the point may be that finding differences is important, among other reasons, because it can yield differentiae).

**105a25–31.** Each of the tools is a procedure of some sort; Aristotle’s point is that the *results* of using the last three can be expressed as propositions (cf. Alexander, 88. 25–30). There may be more than a trivial point at work here. In the terminology of modern logical theory, if B follows logically from A, then ‘If A then B’ is logically true; therefore, the premisses of an argument may include statements expressing the logical relationships of other premisses. This passage may indicate Aristotle’s awareness that rules of inference which *apply to* a deductive system may also be *expressed within* the system. However, the question whether, and how, Aristotle distinguished logical truths from other truths is a most difficult one.