### CHAPTER 2

**157a** **18** When arguing, use deduction with those skilled in debate more than with the public; contrariwise, use induction more with the **20** public. We have also discussed this earlier.

In some cases, it is possible for a person performing an induction to put the universal as a question. In other cases, however, this is not easy because a common name has not been assigned to all similarities; rather, when people have to obtain the universal, they **25** say ‘thus in all such cases’. But this is one of the most difficult of things, to determine which of the cases brought forward are ‘such’ and which are not. It is also by this means that people often hoodwink one another in arguments, some saying that things are similar when they are really not and others protesting that similar things are not similar. For this reason, you should try in all such cases to **30** make up a name yourself, so that it will not be possible either for the answerer to protest that the case introduced is not similarly designated, nor for the questioner to quibble that it is similarly designated—since many things which are not similarly designated still appear to be so.

When it happens that, after you have induced from many cases, **35** someone does not grant the universal, then it is your right to ask him for an objection. However, when you have not stated that it does hold of some cases, you have no right to ask ‘of which cases does it not hold?’ For you must previously carry out an induction to ask for an objection in this way.

And he is expected not to bring his objections about the very case that was proposed, unless there should be only one such thing **157b** (as two is the only even number that is prime): for the person objecting must bring an objection about a different case or say that this is the only such case.

Against people who object to the universal statement but bring their objection not against the statement itself but against some **5** thing equivocal, e.g. that someone might have a colour or foot or hand that is not his, since a painter has a colour and a cook has a foot that are not theirs—in such cases, then, you should make distinctions when asking questions, for if the equivocation goes unnoticed he will seem to have objected properly to the premiss proposed.

But if the answerer blocks the question by objecting, not about **10** an equivocal case, but about the thing itself, then you must put forward premisses by subtracting that to which the objection applies and making the remainder the universal, until you have obtained what you need. For example, take the case of forgetting or having forgotten. For people do not agree that a person who has lost knowledge has forgotten, because when the subject changes he **15** has lost his knowledge but has not forgotten it. Subtracting that to which the objection applies, then, you should state the remainder, e.g. that if someone loses his knowledge when the subject persists, it is because he has forgotten. And similarly also with those who object, ‘Why is it that to a greater good is opposed a greater evil?’ For they bring forward the fact that to health, which is a lesser good than good condition, a greater evil is opposed (for disease is a **20** greater evil than poor condition). In this case too, then, you should subtract that to which the objection applies. For when it is subtracted, the answerer would more readily concede, e.g. that to a greater good is opposed a greater evil unless one of them brings the other with it (as good condition does health).

**25** Do this not only if the answerer has made an objection, but even if he has refused without objecting because he foresees something like this. For when that to which his objection applies is subtracted, he will be forced to concede because he does not foresee in what is left a case of which it does not hold (and if he does not concede, then when he is asked for an objection he will not be able to respond at all). The premisses which are of this type are those that **30** are true about some things and false about others: for it is in these cases that it is possible to subtract and leave behind a true remainder.

But if you put forward a premiss about many cases and he brings no objection, then he is expected to concede it, for a premiss is dialectical if it holds of many cases and there is no objection against it.

**35** When it is possible to deduce the same thing both without and with argument through the impossible, then, although for someone who is demonstrating and not debating it makes no difference whether it is deduced in one way or the other, someone who is debating with another should not use the deduction through the impossible. For against someone who has deduced without the impossible, it is not possible to protest. However, when he has deduced the impossible <result>, then unless it is extremely obvious **158a** that it is false, people will say that it is not impossible, so that questioners do not get what they want.

One ought also to propose those premisses which hold of many cases and for which either an objection is not possible at all or it is not a simple matter to discern it. For if they cannot discern the **5** cases about which it does not hold, they will concede it as being true.

But you must not make the conclusion a question. Otherwise, if he rejects it, it appears that no deduction has occurred. For even when one does not ask the conclusion but introduces it as that **10** which results, people often reject it, and in doing this they do not appear to have been refuted—to those who do not understand what follows from the concessions. So, when you ask it without even saying that it follows and he denies it, it appears quite as though no deduction has occurred.

Not everything that is universal seems to be a dialectical premiss, **15** for example ‘What is a human?’ or ‘In how many ways is “good” said?’ For a dialectical premiss is one to which it is possible to answer yes or no, but this is not possible with the premisses mentioned; therefore, such questions are not dialectical unless you give the definition or distinction yourself in stating them, e.g. ‘Is it the **20** case that “good” is said either in this way or in that?’ For in response to things of this sort, it is easy to answer by either assenting or dissenting, and you must therefore try to put forward such premisses in this way. At the same time, you probably also have a right to inquire of the answerer in how many ways ‘good’ is used, when you make the determinations yourself and put them forth but he does not agree with any of them.

**25** Whoever spends a long time presenting a single argument is doing a bad job of getting answers. For if the person being questioned is answering, then clearly <he is doing a bad job> because he is asking either many questions or the same ones repeatedly, so that he is either rambling or has no deduction (for every deduction is from few premisses). On the other hand, if his respondent is not answering, then <the questioner is clearly doing a **30** bad job> because he does not either criticize him or abandon the argument.