### CHAPTER 15

**106a** Concerning premisses, then, what has been said is enough. But as for the number of ways <something is said>, our investigation should not only study which things are called something in different ways but should also try to give definitions for them. For instance, **5** we should say, not only that justice and courage are called goods in one way while that which produces fitness and the healthful are so called in another way, but also that the former are so called in virtue of themselves being of a certain sort, whereas the latter are so called in virtue of being productive of something, and not in virtue of themselves being of a certain sort. And likewise also in the other cases.

Whether the ways in which things are called something are many **10** or one in species should be investigated by means of the following:

First is to examine the contrary to see if it is said in several ways and if they disagree either in species or in name. For sometimes, there is a difference right in the very names, e.g. the contrary of ‘sharp’ is ‘flat’ in a sound but ‘blunt’ in a body. It is clear, then, that the contrary of ‘sharp’ is said in many ways. But if that is, then so **15** is ‘sharp’. For in each of these cases, the contrary will be different—the same ‘sharp’ will not be contrary to ‘blunt’ and ‘flat’—but ‘sharp’ is contrary to each. Again, the contrary of ‘flat’ is ‘sharp’ in sound but ‘round’ in body. Therefore, ‘flat’ is said in several ways, since its contrary is also. And similarly, also, in the case of a picture **20** the contrary of ‘fine’ is ‘ugly’, but in the case of a lineage it is ‘base’, so that ‘fine’ is equivocal.

In some cases, there is no disagreement at all in the names, but in the species the difference between them is obvious at once, as in the case of ‘bright’ and ‘dark’: for a sound is called bright or **25** dark, and similarly a colour. Now in names, these do not disagree; in the species, however, the difference between them is obvious at once, for the colour and the sound are not called bright in the same way.

This is also clear through sensory perception. For the same sense **30** perceives things which are the same in species. But we do not discern white in the case of a sound and a colour by means of the same sense: rather, we discern one by sight and the other by hearing. The same holds for ‘rough’ and ‘smooth’ in tastes and in bodies (except that we discern one with touch and the other with taste): **35** these too do not disagree in names—either those which apply to them or those which apply to their contraries—for ‘smooth’ is in fact the contrary of each.

Next, if there is something contrary to one but nothing at all contrary to the other. For example, to the pleasure which comes from drinking, the pain which comes from being thirsty is contrary, but to <the pleasure> which comes from contemplating the fact that the diagonal <of a square> is incommensurable with its side **106b** nothing is <contrary>. Thus, pleasure is said in many ways. And to the loving that is a matter of thought, hating is contrary, but to that which is a bodily activity, nothing is: it is clear, then, that loving is equivocal.

Next, turning to the intermediates, if there is something intermediate for one <pair of contraries> but nothing for the other, or if **5** there is something for both but not the same thing. For instance, between bright and dark in colour there is ‘grey’, but in sound there is none—or, if indeed there is one, it is ‘nasal’, as some people say that a nasal voice is intermediate. So, ‘bright’ is equivocal, and likewise also ‘dark’. Next, if there are several intermediates for one **10** pair but one for the other, as in the case of bright and dark: for in the case of colours the intermediates are many, while in the case of sound there is the single one ‘nasal’.

Next is examining the contradictory opposite to see if it is said in multiple ways. For if this is said in multiple ways, then that which is **15** opposite to it will also be said in multiple ways. For instance, ‘not to see’ is said in multiple ways, one being ‘not to possess sight’ and the other ‘not to exercise one’s sight’. But if this is said in multiple ways, then ‘to see’ must be also: for to each ‘not seeing’ something is opposed, i.e. having sight to not having it, or exercising one’s **20** sight to not exercising it.

Next is examining things which are expressed as privation and state. For if one of these is said in multiple ways, then the remaining one is also. For instance, if ‘sensation’ is said in multiple ways of the soul and of the body, then ‘insensible’ will also be said in multiple ways of the soul and of the body. (And that it is as **25** privation and state that the things just mentioned are opposed is clear, since it is natural for animals to have each kind of sensation, both that with respect to the soul and that with respect to the body.)

Next, inflected forms should be examined. For if ‘justly’ is said in **30** multiple ways, then ‘just’ will also be said in multiple ways (for there is a ‘just’ in accordance with each ‘justly’). For instance, if ‘justly’ means both judging in accordance with one’s own opinion and <judging> as one ought, then so also ‘just’. Likewise, if ‘healthful’ is said in multiple ways, then ‘healthfully’ will also be **35** said in multiple ways. For instance, if what produces health, what preserves it, and what indicates it are healthful, then ‘healthfully’ will mean ‘productively’ or ‘preservatively’ or ‘indicatingly’ <of health>. And similarly also in other cases: whenever a term itself is said in multiple ways, then the inflected form derived from it will **107a** also be said in multiple ways; and if the inflected form is, then so is the term itself.

There is also examining the categories of predication of the word to see if these are the same in all cases. For if they are not the same, it is clear that the expression is equivocal. For instance, the good in **5** foods is what produces pleasure, in medicine what produces health; but in the case of the soul, it is being of a certain sort (e.g. temperate, courageous, or just) and similarly in the case of a person. Sometimes, it is a time, e.g. what is opportune <is good> (for that which is opportune is called good). Often, it is a quantity, as in the **10** case of what is proportionate (for the proportionate is also called good). Consequently, ‘good’ is equivocal.

Likewise, bright is a colour in the case of a body, but in the case of a sound it is the easy to hear. Sharp is much like this, for likewise the same thing is not meant in all cases. For it is the rapid sound **15** which is sharp (as those who do numerical harmonics say), but it is the angle less than a right one which is sharp, or the sharp-angled knife.

And there is examining the genera of the things under the same word to see if these are different and not subordinate to one another. Take ‘donkey’ as an example (both the animal and the **20** machine). For the definition of the word is different for these: the one will be given as ‘an animal of a certain sort’, the other as ‘a machine of a certain sort’. But if the genera are subordinate to one another, then it is not necessary for the definitions to be different. For instance, animal and bird are both a genus of raven. When we say, then, that a raven is a bird, we also say that **25** it is a certain kind of animal, so that both genera are predicated of it. And similarly, also, when we call a raven a flying biped animal, we say that it is a bird. Also in this way, then, both genera, as well as their definitions, are predicated of the raven. But in the case of genera which are not subordinate to one another, this **30** does not happen. For when we call something a machine, we do not call it an animal; nor, when we call it an animal, do we call it a machine.

And there is examining not only the term under consideration to see if the genera are different and not subordinate to each other, but also its contrary (for if its contrary is said in many ways, then it **35** is clear that what is under consideration is also).

It is also useful to examine the definition we have of a complex, e.g. of a white body or a white sound: for if what is unique <to each> is subtracted, the same definition must remain. But this does **107b** not happen in the case of equivocals, e.g. in the cases just mentioned: for one is ‘a body having such and such a colour’, but the other is ‘a sound easy to hear’. When we subtract ‘body’ and ‘sound’, then, what remains in each case is not the same: but it **5** would have to be, if the ‘white’ said in each case were univocal.

But frequently something equivocal tags along unnoticed in the definitions themselves, and for this reason you should also examine the definitions. For instance, if someone says that what indicates and what produces health is what is commensurately related to **10** health, we should not give up but instead should examine what he has meant by ‘commensurately’ in each case, e.g. if one is ‘of such an amount as to produce health’ and the other is ‘such as to signify of what sort one’s condition is’.

Next, if they fail to be comparable with respect to ‘more’ or ‘equally’, as for instance a white sound and a white coat, or a sharp **15** taste and a sharp sound. For these are not called equally white or sharp, nor is one called more so than the other. So ‘white’ and ‘sharp’ are equivocal. For everything univocal is comparable: either they will be equally so called, or one will be more so.

Since the differentiae of things from different genera that are not subordinate to one another are also different in kind (take for **20** example animal and knowledge: the differentiae of these are different), there is examining whether the things falling under the same word are differentiae of different genera that are not subordinate to one another, like ‘sharp’ of a sound and of a body: for one sound differs from another by being sharp, and similarly one body from **25** another, so that ‘sharp’ is equivocal (for these are differentiae of different genera that are not subordinate to one another).

Next, if the differentiae of the actual things the same name applies to are different, as colour in the case of bodies and colour in melodies. For the differentiae of colour in the case of bodies are ‘distending the sight’ and ‘compressing the sight’, but the differen- **30** tiae of colour in the case of melodies are not the same. So, ‘colour’ is equivocal, for the same things have the same differentiae.

Next, since the species is not a differentia of anything, there is examining the things falling under the same word to see if one is a species and the other a differentia. For instance, white in the case of **35** bodies is a species of colour, but white in the case of sounds is a differentia (for one sound differs from another in virtue of being white).

### COMMENTARY

## BOOK ONE

### CHAPTER 16

**107b38–108a6.** Aristotle’s brief remarks about finding differences distinguish two cases: comparing things within the same genus and comparing things from different genera (he makes this same distinction again shortly below in discussing the study of similarities). Finding differences is not discovering *that* things differ but discovering *in virtue of what* they differ. Within a single genus, the difference in virtue of which one species differs from another is the differentia in a technical sense. Thus, as Aristotle says in VI. 6, 143b3–10, the differentia is ‘the difference that makes a species’ (*eidopoios diaphora*: ‘specific difference’).

When Aristotle says that ‘the differences are completely obvious’ in the case of very different things, he must mean, not that it is completely obvious that such things differ, but that it is completely obvious *how* they differ. This is not beyond question: questions like ‘What is the difference between a frog and a bicycle?’ or ‘How is twelve different from being on the left?’ can seem puzzling. Aristotle would presumably say, of very different things in different genera, that they fall in different genera. Thus in these cases the difference will not be a differentia, since differentiae only fall within a single genus.

### CHAPTER 17

**108a7–17.** Studying similarities is a complementary process to finding differences, and Aristotle’s remarks about it are comparably brief. As with finding difference, he distinguishes the two cases of things in different genera and things in the same genus. For things in different genera, Aristotle proposes looking for analogical relationships. This may reflect the fact that it will be harder to find a single predicate true of such cases, but this may also be a device Aristotle recommends for discovering wider and wider genera: cf. 108b23–31 and *An. Post.* I. 5, 74a4–25.

He may recommend concentrating our practice on widely different things either because the other cases are easy (cf. what he says about the analogous case for differentiae in 108a4–6) or because this will make us better able to deal with all cases. I have tried to retain this ambiguity in translation, though the following sentence makes the former interpretation more likely.

### CHAPTER 18

The final chapter of Book I discusses the usefulness of three of the tools: studying the numbers of ways something is said, finding differences, and finding likenesses. There is no discussion of the usefulness of the first tool, obtaining premisses. This may be because, as Alexander suggests, its usefulness for constructing arguments is obvious. But Aristotle also said in I. 13 that the other three tools might in a way be reduced to finding premisses.

**108a18–37.** Aristotle lists three reasons why it is useful for dialecticians to have studied the numbers of senses of terms. On clarity, compare VIII. 7: in dialectical exchanges, the answerer had a right to refuse to answer ambiguous questions and to demand, or offer, a clarification. ‘Arguing about a word’ is the speciality of sophists and ‘eristics’. What Aristotle says here makes the most sense as a way of avoiding their arguments, i.e. taking note of multiple senses and then assenting to a question only on one construal (which would indeed make an opponent who persisted with the other sense look ridiculous).

The second use is limited to the answerer in an exchange. The mention of producing fallacies as well as resisting them might be taken to support a more combative view of dialectical argument in which no holds are barred. But Aristotle has already defined dialectical deductions as valid arguments, and here he adds at once the remark that producing fallacies is not appropriate to dialectic. Even so, it is curious that he implies it might be acceptable to resort to this kind of sophistry when all else fails. Perhaps he means: ‘If you have fallen in with sophists, you may be forced to resort to sophistry’.

**108a38–b6.** It is obvious enough that finding differences will yield arguments about what is different (and thus, negatively, about what is the same). A short compendium of such arguments appears in VII. 1. The phrase ‘unique account of the being of anything’ corresponds to the definition of ‘definition’ as ‘account of what it is to be’ (101b38), with ‘being’ (*ousia*) in place of ‘the what it is to be’. In I. 4 Aristotle distinguished definitions from (other) unique properties on the grounds that definitions signify what it is to be; here, he makes the complementary move of separating definitions from other predicates in the what-it-is on the basis of their being unique to their subjects. The phrase ‘we usually separate’ shows that Aristotle is reminding his audience of a practice of defining by genus and differentia with which they are already familiar.

**108b7–31.** The three uses for the study of similarities give us glimpses of other aspects of Aristotle’s logical theory (one could wish that they were more fully developed).

**108b9–12.** ‘Inductive arguments’: the general point here is that an inductive argument must rest on a collection of *similar* cases about each of which the same thing is true. If these similar cases were (perceptible) individuals, then the relevant criterion of similarity would be a perceived likeness, something not likely to be advanced by the kind of study Aristotle has in mind. Therefore, induction here must rather be the generalization from many similar *species* to a genus containing them all.

‘Bringing in’: *epagein* commonly means ‘lead in’, ‘bring in’, and can be used of introducing witnesses in a legal case. Although Aristotle often uses it to mean ‘perform an induction’, some indication of the root sense makes this passage clearer: thus, I translate *epagōgē* as ‘bringing in’. ‘Claim a right’ (*axioun*) is used, especially in Book VIII, of moves we are entitled to make in a dialectical exchange. Aristotle says that if the answerer accepts the particular cases on which an induction rests, the questioner can expect him to concede the generalization; if this is refused, the questioner has a right to demand a contrary instance. See the Commentary on VIII. 2, 157a34–b33, and VIII. 8.

**108b12–19.** ‘Deductions from an assumption’: the arguments considered here have a fairly precise structure. Aristotle says, first, that they rest on the general principle that it is ‘accepted’ that like is true of like, that is, that the *general* premiss ‘like is true of like’ is something we can always count on getting accepted. The ensuing argument then is, in effect, an argument from analogy: we obtain a case similar to the one we want to deal with, establish a result about it analogous to the conclusion we want, and then say that the same thing goes for our original case. Aristotle describes this as resting on an explicit agreement: we ‘establish an agreement in advance’ with our respondent that whatever holds of one case holds of the other.

He does not make it clear whether he regards these as the *only* kinds of ‘arguments from an assumption’. Other sorts appear in other discussions (see *An. Pr.* I. 29, 45b15–20, I. 44). Both ancient and modern commentators have been much exercised to determine exactly how such arguments are related to other aspects of Aristotle’s logical theory.

**108b19–31.** Aristotle’s remarks about the usefulness of a study of similarity in connection with giving definitions recall the twofold division into cases involving things in the same genus and cases involving ‘very different’ things, as in I. 16 and I. 17. Concerning the first, he gives us a definition of ‘genus’. Earlier, he said that a thing’s genus was predicated in the manner of what it is of it and of other things as well; I take ‘common’ here to reflect this, so that a thing’s genus must be a predicate common to it and other things. ‘Most in the manner of what it is’ presumably differentiates the closest (narrowest) genus from higher genera.

In the case of ‘greatly differing’ things, Aristotle again makes use of analogical similarities (cf. 108a7–17 and Commentary).

**108b32–3.** This last sentence introduces the ‘locations’ (*topoi*) contained in Books II–VII. The ‘aforementioned’ are presumably the tools, which it would be natural to call ‘useful’. See the Introduction for further discussion of what a *topos* is and how it would be employed to find premisses.