## BOOK EIGHT

### CHAPTER I

**155b** After this we should discuss arrangement, that is, how one should ask questions. First, then, the person who is going to be devising questions must find the location from which to attack; second, he **5** must devise the questions, and arrange them individually, to himself; and only third and last does he ask these of someone else. Now, up to the point of finding the location, the philosopher’s inquiry and the dialectician’s proceed alike, but actually arranging these things and devising questions is unique to the dialectician. **10** For all of that is directed at someone else. But the philosopher, or someone searching by himself, does not care if the <premisses> through which his deduction comes about are true and intelligible but the answerer does not concede them because they are close to the initial goal and he foresees what is going to result; rather, the **15** philosopher would in fact probably be eager for his claims to be as intelligible and as close <to the initial goal> as possible, for it is from such that scientific deductions proceed.

The attack-locations from which one should get <premisses>, then, were discussed earlier. We must discuss arrangement and devising questions, determining which premisses are to be obtained **20** besides those necessary. The premisses through which the deduction comes about are called necessary; those obtained besides these are of four kinds. They are either for the sake of induction and giving the universal, or to give bulk to the argument, or for the concealment of the conclusion, or to make the argument clearer. **25** Apart from these, you should not obtain any other premisses, but instead it is through them that you should try to build up your argument and devise questions. (Premisses for concealment are for the sake of the contest: but since this entire sort of business is directed at someone else, it is necessary to use these too.)

Now, as for the necessary premisses through which the deduc- **30** tions come about, you should not put these forward right away, but instead you should stand off as far above them as possible. For example, do not expect to get that the same science applies to contraries, should that be what you want, but rather that it applies to opposites. For if he concedes this, it can be deduced that the science applying to contraries is also the same, since contraries are opposites. If, however, he does not concede this, then get <the premiss you need> through induction by putting forward premisses about particular contraries. For you should get the necessary **35** premisses either through deduction or through induction, or some by induction and others by deduction. (But if they are extremely obvious, the premisses themselves may also be put forward.) For in **156a** either standing off or induction, it is always less clear what is going to result; at the same time, it is still open to you to put forward the actual premisses to be used, if you are unable to get them in the former ways. But the additional premisses we mentioned should be obtained for these purposes, and each should be used in that way: **5** when you are arguing inductively, <argue> from particulars to universal and from the familiar to the unfamiliar (it is premisses based on perception that are more familiar, either unconditionally or to most people), and when you are concealing give preliminary deductions of the premisses from which the deduction of the initial thesis is going to come about. And get as many of these as possible. **10** This would result if you were to deduce not just the necessary premisses but even some of the ones useful for getting them. Next, do not state the conclusions, but instead deduce them all together later on (for in so doing, you would stand furthest off from the initial thesis).

Speaking generally, the person who is getting answers in a **15** concealed manner must ask in such a way that when the whole argument has been presented in questions and he has stated his conclusion, the reason why is to be sought. But this will best come about if we argue in the way just stated. For if only the last conclusion is stated, it will not be clear how it follows, because the answerer will not foresee what premisses it follows from if the **20** deductions were not spelt out previously. And the deduction of the conclusion would be spelt out to the least degree if we set down, not the premisses of that deduction, but rather those of <the deductions of the premisses> through which that deduction comes about.

It is also useful to avoid obtaining the claims the deductions are **25** made from in an orderly fashion but instead to obtain premisses for this and that conclusion in alternation. For if appropriate premisses are put next to one another, what is going to result from them will immediately be too obvious.

Also, in those cases in which it is possible, you should get the **30** universal premiss by means of a definition that applies, not to terms themselves, but to their co-ordinates. For people fallaciously conclude that they are not agreeing to the universal when the definition of the co-ordinate has been obtained. For example, if what has to be got is ‘the angry desire retribution because of an apparent slight’ and it could be obtained that anger is a desire for retribution because of an apparent slight (for it is clear that once the latter were obtained, we should have the universal we are aiming at). It often happens to those who put forward <a premiss> involving the **35** actual terms that the answerer refuses because he is more ready with an objection to it, e.g. ‘those who are angry do not desire revenge since we get angry with our parents but do not desire retribution from them.’ Now, his objection is probably not correct, for in the case of some people it is retribution enough to hurt them **156b** and make them regret; nevertheless, he does have something plausible so as not to appear to be rejecting the premiss proposed without reason. But with the definition of anger, it is not equally easy to find an objection.

Next, propose a premiss as if proposing it not on its own but **5** for the sake of something else: for people are cautious about things which are useful towards the thesis. And in a word, make it unclear, as much as possible, whether you want to get what you put forward or its opposite. For if it is unclear which one is useful for the argument, then people will more often concede what they think.

**10** Next, get answers through similarity. For not only is this convincing, but in addition the universal gets by more readily. For instance, ‘Just as the knowledge and ignorance of contraries are the same, so also the perception of contraries is the same.’ Or in the other direction: ‘Since the perception is the same, the knowledge is too.’ This is similar to induction, but actually not the same thing. For in **15** that procedure, the universal is obtained from the particulars, but in the case of similar things what is obtained is not the universal which all the similar things fall under.

You should also bring an objection against yourself occasionally. For answerers relax their guard with those who appear to be **20** playing fair in their attack. It is also useful to note that such-and-such is familiar or an old saying: for people are reluctant to go against custom if they have no objection to it, and at the same time, since they use such things themselves, they guard against upsetting them.

Next, do not be too eager, even if it is something you really need, **25** because people are more likely to oppose those who are eager. And propose things as if they were illustrations, for if something is put forward for some other reason and not useful in itself people will more readily concede it. Next, do not put forward the thing you actually need to obtain, but rather something which this follows of necessity. For people more readily agree because it is not equally evident what is going to follow from this, and when the latter has been obtained, the former has also.

And ask near the end for the thing you most want to get. For it **30** is the first things that people reject the most, since most questioners say first what they are most eager to get. With some people, however, these are the things to propose first: for cantankerous people agree most readily to the first things, so long as it is not completely obvious what result they are headed for, but become cantankerous **35** towards the end. And similarly also with people who think they are clever in answering: for after they have conceded the first points, towards the end they quibble and say that the conclusion does not follow from what was conceded; but they concede things off-handedly, trusting in their talent and believing that they cannot be convinced of anything.

Next, stretch out your argument and throw in things of no use **157a** towards it, as those who draw fake diagrams do (for when there are many details, it is not clear in which the error lies). That is also why questioners who proceed surreptitiously sometimes get away with including premisses which, if put forward by themselves, would **5** never be conceded.

For concealment, then, you should use the things stated. But for embellishment, you should use induction and the division of related things. Now, as to induction, it is clear what sort of thing it is. Division, however, is this sort of thing: ‘One science is better than another either in being more exact or in being about better things’, **10** or ‘Some sciences are theoretical, some practical, and others productive.’ For anyone of these sorts of things embellishes the argument, though it is not necessary to state them in order to get the conclusion.

For clarity, you should bring in examples and illustrations. And the examples should be familiar ones, taken from sources we know **15** (‘as Homer says’, not ‘as Choirilos says’), for in this way what is put forward would be clearer.

# COMMENTARY

## BOOK EIGHT

### CHAPTER 1

**155b3–16.** ‘Arrangement’ (*taxis*), the determination of just what questions to ask one’s opponent, in what order, and in what way, is the subject of Book VIII. Aristotle begins with a striking comparison of dialectical and demonstrative (‘philosophical’) arguments which gives valuable clues about his understanding of several notions. To begin with, he describes both the philosopher and the dialectician as seeking for premisses from which to establish a given conclusion. Next, the ‘locations’ are useful to the philosopher as well as to the dialectician in their quests. Third, the critical difference between the two procedures lies in the epistemic qualities sought in the premisses. What the dialectician needs is premisses an opponent will accept; what the philosopher needs is true and intelligible premisses.

There is, of course, a difference in form between dialectical arguments, which consist of questions, and demonstrations, which consist of assertions. Underlying this, however, is a difference of purpose. The dialectical questioner aims at getting a conclusion *from an opponent*: and an opponent will usually have the opposite aim of not conceding that conclusion or anything which will lead to it. If we abstract from their form of presentation, then, premisses which would make for a totally perspicuous argument would yield a good demonstration and a bad dialectical argument for exactly the same reason, to wit, that it is obvious where it is leading. (Compare the remarks on concealment below, especially **156a13–15**.)

If we bear this in mind, then we shall be less tempted to think that dialectical argument has a deceptive character, as some have concluded. To begin with, a dialectical argument aims at drawing a conclusion which *actually does follow* from premisses an interlocutor accepts; if the conclusion only appears to follow, then the argument is not dialectical but contentious. At most, the procedures of concealment, etc., that we find here might keep an answerer from refusing to concede a premiss just in order to avoid an unwanted conclusion. But in that case, the answerer would probably have to fall back on answering on the basis of his actual opinions, and it is scarcely deceptive to show someone what consequences follow from his opinions.

**155b5.** ‘devising questions’ (*erōtēmatizein*): this unusual word (from *erōtēma*, ‘question’, + verbal suffix *-izein*: ‘questionize’, ‘devise questions’) may be Aristotle’s own coinage. It seems not to be a mere synonym for *erōtan*; it has a technical, perhaps slightly humorous ring. Aristotle uses it of the process of arranging (e.g. in thought) a series of questions to be asked in an exchange. As emerges from the discussion of this process (VIII. 1–3, **155b18–159a14**), it is mostly a matter of keeping your opponent in the dark about what your argument actually is until it is too late.

There are two stages in determining the questions to put to an opponent. The first is the discovery of the premisses themselves, relying on the locations and the tables of accepted premisses. This is already ‘directed at another’, since the nature of the opponent must be taken into account in selecting the premisses. This would yield a bare-bones argument consisting of undecorated premisses and conclusion. The process of devising questions transforms this into a script for a dialectical exchange by setting the order in which the premisses will be presented and the verbal form in which they will be asked, and perhaps by adding other premisses for a variety of reasons. All this is then to be rehearsed mentally (presumably with allowances being made for various possible answers from the respondent).

Given the close association of Book VIII with an institutionalized form of dialectical exchange, all this can be seen as a very specific point in a round of gymnastic dialectic: we may imagine that after a pair of contestants has chosen or been assigned a thesis, the questioner is allowed some period of time in which to think through a strategy. However, it is equally plausible that Aristotle is offering relatively general advice on how to get ready for arguments with anyone.

**155b10–16.** ‘close to the initial goal’: since both dialectician and demonstrator start out with a conclusion and try to discover an argument for it, the conclusion to be proved is ‘the initial thing’ (*to ex archēs*, *to en archēi*): I supply ‘goal’ interpretatively. Aristotle makes frequent use of this phrase in the *Analytics* as well as the *Topics*, and it appears to have been an established technical term of dialectic. We find it in the phrase *to ex archēs aiteisthai*, ‘asking for the initial thing’, which is the ancestor of that some-what bizarre English phrase ‘begging the question’ (see the Commentary on VIII. 13). In a dialectical exchange, the ‘initial thing’ sought is the contradictory of the answerer’s position. In dialectical terminology, this may be called the ‘problem’ or ‘thesis’ (cf. **104b33–5**), hence my translation (see below, **156a13**, **156b5**). ‘Claims’ (*axiōmata*): the word *axiōma* appears to take on a narrower technical sense (or senses) elsewhere (see *An. Post.* I. 2, 72a16–18, I. 7, 75a41–2, I. 10, 76b14–15; *Met.* B 2, 997a5–11, $\Gamma$ 2, 1005a19–21, $\Gamma$ 3, 1005b32–4), and there may in some cases be a justification for translating it as ‘axiom’. However, Aristotle often uses it just to mean ‘proposition’ or ‘premiss’, as the Stoics later did (see e.g. **156a23**). Its parent verb *axioun* often means ‘claim’ or ‘have a right to’ (cf. a premiss) in the rest of Book VIII (see the Commentary on **108b9–12**), and it is reasonable to speak of the premisses of a demonstration as the demonstrator’s ‘claims’. Alternatively, the sense may be ‘expectations’, i.e. ‘what the demonstration expects you already to know’.

**155b17–28.** ‘Necessary’ premisses: the phrase is verbally identical to that which Aristotle uses in the *Prior Analytics* to characterize modally necessary (as opposed to possible or assertoric) premisses. What is meant here, however, is ‘premisses it is necessary to have in order to carry out the deduction’. ‘Needful’ might capture this better, but it is important to reproduce the verbal connection for historical reasons (for instance, it might be thought unlikely that Aristotle would have used ‘necessary premiss’ in the present sense after writing *An. Pr.* I).

The various sorts of ‘non-necessary’ premisses Aristotle lists do include some which have no effect on the deductive validity of the argument and only serve to make it fancy or harder for the respondent to comprehend (see **157a1–3**, **6–13**). However, the greater part of his attention under this head is given to the further premisses from which these ‘necessary’ premisses can be deduced or inductively inferred. Therefore ‘necessary’ is not contrasted with ‘irrelevant’ but rather with something like ‘more than the minimum required for a deduction’. Alexander, calling on the theory of inference in *An. Pr.* I, takes this to mean ‘the two premisses necessary for a deduction’. But all that Aristotle need mean is ‘the premisses discovered by using an appropriate location’. (The plurals in **155b36–7**, ‘some by induction and others by deduction’, suggest that Aristotle is not thinking of exactly two premisses.)

Aristotle lists four sorts of premiss it is legitimate to propose as questions, or rather four purposes which such a proposition may serve: it may be used as evidence for an induction, to add ‘bulk’ to the argument, to hide the conclusion, or to make the argument ‘clearer’. As it appears, the first three of these really are concerned with ‘concealment’. Of course, this will not be a matter of hiding the conclusion itself, since in a dialectical exchange both parties already know what it is that is being attacked or defended. Concealment is rather not letting your opponent see how you are trying to get to that conclusion. The fourth purpose, making the argument ‘clearer’, might seem to be opposed to this general aim, but as **157a14–17** show, Aristotle means ‘making some premiss proposed clearer’, i.e. making one’s opponent more likely to accept it.

Although he makes no explicit mention of them in this list, he proceeds at once to distinguish a fifth class of ‘unnecessary’ premisses, namely, premisses from which the necessary premisses can be deduced. It might appear that these should be regarded as ‘necessary’ in the sense that they are not deductively superfluous to the argument (or to the argument that results from the substitution). In fact, we might think that such a replacement is analogous to the replacement of a premiss in a demonstration by further premisses from which it can be deduced. Since demonstrative science aims at just such a replacement, continued until the entire demonstration rests only on indemonstrable first principles, we might even think that in the present case there is a similar epistemic advantage. However, the epistemic situation in dialectic is different: the premisses must be something the respondent will accept. The procedure for finding premisses, as I have reconstructed it, will *already* have given us premisses our opponent is likely to concede. Replacing such a premiss with others from which it follows will not necessarily help us in a dialectical situation, and indeed may make things worse except in the lucky situation in which these other premisses are at least as acceptable to our opponent as the one they replace. Their real utility will lie, not in some superior epistemic status, but in the possibility that the answerer will not realize exactly why they are being put forward (i.e. to get further premisses from which the conclusion follows at once). Thus, their real value is for the purpose of concealment.

Aristotle’s remarks about these four purposes are confusing. In keeping with his general position elsewhere that inductive generalization is how we establish universal propositions, he lists induction here as useful for obtaining ‘necessary’ premisses (**155b34–7**); later, however, it is classified (along with ‘division’) as an ‘embellishment’ (**157a6–13**). Induction itself is treated in only a few lines (**156a4–7**), which simply give a brief description of it. ‘Bulk’ is not clearly discussed anywhere, although that is probably the purpose of the section on ‘embellishment’; ‘clarity’ gets a brief notice (**157a14–17**). Almost all of Aristotle’s discussion (up to **157a5**) is about ‘concealment’.

**155b24–5.** ‘should not obtain’: most translators render this ‘need not try to get any other premisses’, i.e. the types mentioned are all that is useful. But as the next sentence make clear, Aristotle’s advice is that the four types mentioned are the only ones which *should* be introduced into an argument. Alexander gives it the even stronger sense ‘it is impossible to take any further types of premisses’ (522. 16–19), but this seems to me unwarranted.

**155b26–8.** Why is it *necessary* to use such devices? Presumably because there is no other way to bring the opponent we are faced with to the conclusion we are required to reach. But then, dialectic seems to blend insensibly into sophistical or combative argument, which reaches its conclusion by any means whatsoever. Such a result is probably unavoidable. It is really not possible to make sense of dialectic apart from the various uses to which it might be put, and these may include Socratic examination, argumentative persuasion, exercises for the improvement of dialectical skill, or philosophical inquiry. Greater or lesser degrees of trickery may be appropriate to these occasions: a Socratic refutation, for instance, must employ a little concealment if it is to be effective in revealing a subject’s unrealized ignorance to him. Much the same thing could be said about our own uses of polemic, in philosophical writing and elsewhere.

**155b29–156a26.** This section outlines a general strategy for concealment making use of induction and a procedure called ‘standing off’. We can best understand Aristotle’s remarks if we remember that he is talking about the process of devising questions and that this process operates on an argument already discovered. Judging by the contents of the books of locations, this argument will probably be a simple one with only two or three premisses from which the needed conclusion follows. However, a simple and obvious argument is hardly the way to proceed with an adversary who already knows the conclusion you are trying to establish and wants to avoid it: any reasonably perceptive respondent will see at once where you are going with your proposed premisses and will try not to concede them. Therefore, you must find a way to conceal your *argument* even while getting your opponent to concede the premisses you will need (the conclusion, of course, is already known to both parties and cannot be concealed).

Aristotle’s general strategy for doing this is to add further layers of argument. Instead of actually putting forward the premisses you want, offer other premisses from which *those* premisses can be derived. Failing that, put forward instances from which the needed premisses can be got through induction; only ask for the actual premisses you want as a last resort, or if they are highly obvious. The point of this process is not to strengthen the argument logically but to make its structure less apparent; the ideal is an argument in which all the premisses can be stated without the answerer being able to see that the conclusion follows from them (**156a13–15**).

It is instructive to compare this notion with some Aristotle uses in *An. Pr.* I. He distinguishes there between ‘complete’ (*teleios*) and ‘incomplete’ (*atelēs*) deductions: the former are deductions in which it is manifest that the conclusion follows from the premisses, the latter deductions in which this is not manifest. One of the products of the theory of the syllogism in *An. Pr.* I. 1–22 is a general account of how to transform any incomplete deduction into a complete one by adding additional steps between premisses and conclusion. In the present case, Aristotle recommends what amounts to the use of deliberately incomplete deductions: we supply a set of premisses from which the conclusion we want follows through a variety of intermediate steps, but we do not supply the intermediate steps. (In **156a23–6** he recommends making it harder still by mixing up the order of the premisses.)

The strong contrast this implies between dialectical and scientific arguments seems to me a major difficulty for any interpretation that supposes dialectical argument can somehow establish scientific first principles. At the very least, such a view would have to regard this passage, and many others in Book VIII, as applying only to *some* dialectical arguments.

**155b29–30.** ‘Standing off’ is a matter of finding premisses from which the *premisses* of an argument follow, so that I ‘stand off’ from $p$ by first discovering an argument for $p$ and then discovering further arguments for the premisses of this argument (obviously, the process can be repeated for those further premisses, etc., each step leading to a greater degree of ‘standing off’). It may be significant that essentially the same procedure plays a serious role in demonstrative science, where it is called ‘packing full’ or ‘thickening’ (*katapuknousthai*: see *An. Post.* I. 13). Parts of *An. Post.* I (especially I. 3, I. 19–22) are concerned with what we might call ‘premiss regresses’ in which a deduction is expanded in the same way by finding premisses from which its premisses follow, other premisses for those further premisses, etc.: Aristotle holds that in a demonstrative science, no such regress can go on indefinitely. From the standpoint of modern logic, the distinction between the premisses from which $p$ follows and the premisses from which *those* premisses follow is imprecise at best: if a set S of premisses entails all the members of another set P, then S entails any statement $p$ entailed by P. Even if we appeal to the order of steps in a deduction, there may be several deductive paths of different lengths from the same premisses to the same conclusion. In the relatively simple deductive theory of the *Prior Analytics*, however, it is easy to determine the shortest possible derivation of a given conclusion from given premisses.

**155b34.** ‘If, however, he does not concede this’: as Alexander points out, Aristotle’s example shows that he thinks of induction and standing off as alternative means of obtaining a given ‘necessary’ premiss. The sense, then, is: if your opponent will not concede the more universal premiss needed for standing off, then try to get the *original* premiss you needed by induction.

**155b35–156a3.** The point of this somewhat tortuous passage seems to be this: standing off and induction have their value in concealment precisely because the answerer does not know what intermediate conclusion they are aimed at getting. However, this advantage would be lost if a questioner first tried to get a premiss outright and then, failing to get it, resorted to standing off or induction, for in that case the cat is out of the bag. Therefore, he advises, try standing off and induction *first*, and resort to putting forward the premiss itself only if these do not work.

**156a3–10.** The grammar of this passage is very difficult; as it seems to me, other translators have missed the point. It makes most sense if we see it as a complement to **155b35–156a3**, which is about how to get *necessary* premisses. Here he explains how to get *additional* types of necessary premiss beyond those already mentioned at **155b19–24**, explaining that they should be obtained for the sake of standing off or induction. And, since we have obtained them for that purpose, we then should use them in that way: some we shall use in inductions from particulars to universal; others, in preparatory deductions for the premisses from which the initial conclusion will follow.

**156a5–7.** ‘from the familiar to the unfamiliar’: Aristotle usually describes induction only as an inference from particular to general. He also holds that a scientific demonstration, which is a deduction, proceeds from more to less ‘familiar’ things. This clause must therefore be simply an explanatory gloss, not part of the definition of induction. Elsewhere (e.g. *An. Post.* I. 2), Aristotle distinguishes between what is more familiar ‘in itself’ or ‘by nature’ and what is more familiar ‘to us’: the former include the first principles of sciences, the latter the objects of sensory perception. Alexander and others suppose the phrase ‘either unconditionally or to most people’ to be an allusion to this doctrine; but if it is, it is not a very easy one to catch.

**156a7–9.** ‘when you are concealing’: concealment here is a matter of making it hard to see where the argument is going by resting it on premisses at some logical distance from the conclusion (the degree of remoteness is a matter of the number of intervening steps of argument). As the remainder of the passage indicates, Aristotle recommends that we should obtain these premisses while trying not to divulge what we are going to do with them. Concealment of this sort may be deceptive, but it is not deceptive in the way that sophistical reasoning is deceptive (since all the arguments are supposed to be valid).

**156a11–22.** The ‘conclusions’ we are not supposed to state are the intermediate conclusions of preparatory arguments. Given the earlier suggestion to iterate the process of standing off, an ideal stealthy argument will consist of a set of premisses, from which the desired conclusion follows by many intermediate steps, but with none of those steps actually filled in. Thus, such an argument would contain neither actual inductions nor actual preparatory deductions, but only the materials from which to construct them. Though Aristotle does not say so, presumably the questioner who conceals in this way must be prepared, when challenged, to show that the conclusion does indeed follow from the concessions made by the answerer. Alexander supposes that this would require offering an ‘analysis’ that supplied the intermediate steps. It is tempting to see here one possible inspiration for the syllogistic theory itself.

**156a11–12.** ‘deduce them all together later on’: as Alexander observes, Aristotle subsequently assumes that the intermediate conclusions are not mentioned at all until the end of the argument. Therefore, he takes ‘all together’ (*athroa*) to refer, not to these conclusions, but to the premisses: get all the premisses at once, jumbled together in a heap, then state only the desired conclusion. This does take care of one possible objection (if all the other conclusions were actually drawn together, it would not be so difficult to see why the main conclusion followed), but I do not see how to get it out of the Greek. Aristotle may instead have in mind something like this: get all the premisses you need without revealing your argumentative strategy and then, once your answerer has made the necessary concessions, work rapidly through all the steps of the argument to the ultimate conclusion in one continuous sweep.

**156a13.** ‘the initial thesis’: that is, the problem under discussion. According to I. 11, 104b34–6, ‘thesis’ and ‘problem’ were in practice interchangeable terms. (See **156b5**.)

**156a19.** ‘spelt out’ (*diarthrōthentōn*): literally, ‘divided at the joints’, ‘articulated’. But even in anatomical contexts, Aristotle often uses this to mean ‘described in detail’. It is the opposite of ‘described in outline’: cf. *EN* I. 7, 1098a20–4.

**156a21.** ‘the premisses of that deduction’ (*ta toutou lēmmata*): *lēmmata* are ‘things obtained’. If none of the premisses of a deduction is explicitly stated and all are merely implicitly or potentially present as conclusions from other premisses actually stated, then the deduction is at a kind of maximum of incompleteness.

**156a23–6.** Continuing with his discussion of stealthy argumentation, Aristotle recommends mixing up the premisses of different preparatory deductions so as to confuse the answerer further. On ‘claims’ (*axiōmata*), cf. **155b15**, **159a4** and Commentary (the meaning is clearly ‘premisses’). ‘Appropriate’ premisses are those appropriate to a particular conclusion: ‘if the premisses appropriate to each particular conclusion are put together, it will be too obvious what those conclusions are going to be’.

**156a27–b3.** In order to get a certain definition of a term, we should try first to get the corresponding definition of its co-ordinate (see the Introduction). It is a basic rule about co-ordinates that they have co-ordinate definitions: if F is a co-ordinate of G, then the definition of F will be an appropriate co-ordinate transformation of the definition of G (*Top.* VII. 3, 153b25–35). Therefore, if what we want to get is a definition of some term that has co-ordinates, we may instead try to get the co-ordinate definition of its co-ordinate. (Since we are asking for a premiss from which the premiss we want follows, this is an instance of standing off.)

This much is clear. What is less clear is the additional features of the case that Aristotle thinks make one coordinate easier to get than another. In the example, what we want is a definition of ‘angry’, and what we propose instead is the co-ordinate definition of its co-ordinate ‘anger’. Aristotle says that an answerer might reject the proposed definition of ‘angry’ by offering a counter-example (the usual sense of ‘objection’: see **157a34–b33** and Commentary). He then says (i) this is probably not a valid objection; (ii) even so, it would be enough to permit an answerer to refuse the definition without seeming unreasonable; (iii) it would be harder to come up with the objection to the co-ordinate definition of ‘anger’. But if the objection is not valid, then what is the advantage in making it harder to come up with? And if there were a valid objection, what would be the advantage in making that harder to find? In each case, the only advantage seems to be that the questioner makes a better showing (note that the advantage to the answerer in the case Aristotle imagines is that he does not appear to be rejecting the premiss without a reason).

Aristotle does not say why he thinks it is harder to find an objection to the definition of ‘anger’ than to the co-ordinate definition of ‘angry’, but the relevant point may be that the latter is more obviously a universal generalization: we look at once for an objection by asking ‘Are there any angry people who do not want retribution because of an apparent slight?’ It is less obvious what to look for in examining the definition of the abstract term ‘anger’.

The word I translate ‘fallaciously conclude’ (*paralogizontai*) is usually associated with sophistical arguments, but here it means ‘draw a conclusion that does not follow’. Evidently, Aristotle is calling attention to a common error in reasoning which a dialectician may exploit—presumably, failure to recognize the general rule that co-ordinate definitions of co-ordinates follow from one another. How could a questioner exploit this? Suppose that the answerer wrongly believes that $p$ does not follow from $q$ and consequently believes that one can accept $q$ without accepting $p$. What good would it do to obtain $q$ from this answerer as a means of obtaining $p$? One possibility is that the questioner somehow appeals to judges, who overrule the answerer. A more satisfying possibility is that the questioner appeals to the general rule about co-ordinate definitions of co-ordinates, thus showing the answerer *why* he is mistaken.

**156b4–9.** These two sentences seem to offer independent advice, but in fact both involve concealment at a strategic level: keep your opponent in the dark about what premisses you are actually after and what you want to do with them. First, Aristotle proposes a strategy which exploits the procedure of concealment just discussed. An answerer skilled in dialectic will be aware that you may be engaged in ‘standing off’, advancing premisses useful for getting other premisses. If you can make it appear to such an answerer that that is what you are doing when, in fact, you are trying to obtain a premiss directly useful for the deduction of your conclusion, then you may have an easier time getting it accepted. (Presumably, sophisticated respondents will know that it is more work to argue from remote premisses, so they may be less reluctant to grant them.) As in fencing, so in dialectic: there are feints, and feinted feints.

Next, Aristotle advises against leading questions on the ground that the answerer will be inclined not to grant what you show yourself to want. His suggestion is to keep the answerer completely in the dark (rather than e.g. trying to make it look as if you want the opposite of what you want). Note that it is preferable to the questioner using Aristotle’s method that the answerer respond as he really thinks.

**156b10–17.** The process described here is reminiscent of ‘argument from example’ as described in *An. Pr.* II. 24. Aristotle says that the ‘universal gets by more readily’ because in such an argument, the general premiss which comprehends all the examples is not actually used at all, as it is in induction (cf. again *An. Pr.* II. 23–4; this comparison is found in 69a26–19). In effect, then, argument from example has the inferential power of argument from a generalization without the problems of first establishing the universal premiss.

We may wonder why Aristotle says the universal ‘gets by’ or ‘escapes notice’, since on his account it is not even used at all. Pacius’ version of the text would give us ‘it gets by more readily than the universal’ (*mallon tou katholou*)—that is, the *argument* (or perhaps its conclusion) gets past an answerer better than an argument (‘the universal’) in which a universal premiss is required. Unfortunately, none of the manuscript sources appears to have had this reading. Another possibility is that the universal actually is present, but only implicitly: it is presupposed by the inference even if unstated (and if unstated it may escape the answerer’s full attention).

The term I translate ‘get answers’ (*punthanesthai*) means ‘find out through hearing’, and Aristotle occasionally uses it of the questioner in a dialectical exchange (cf. *An. Pr.* I. 1, 24b10).

**156b18–20.** ‘Playing fair in the attack’ (*dikaiōs epicheirein*): in the *Topics*, *epicheirein* always means ‘attack’, not ‘try’. What Aristotle recommends is clearly a matter of dissimulation: the point is to give an appearance, not of attacking *correctly*, but of being fair-minded.

**156b25–7.** An even more blatant species of dissimulation: make the premiss you need look like a mere illustration. Alexander offers a nice illustration: if the premiss you want is ‘self-control is a virtue’, then ask, ‘Don’t you think that, just as self-control is a virtue, so are courage and justice?’ (531. 3–5).

**156b27–30.** This remark would be completely superseded by the preceding elaborate discussion of ‘standing off’. Such passages probably result from the editorial process, whatever it was, through which our text of the *Topics* passed.

**156b30–157a1.** This is a purely tactical procedure, based (evidently) on observations of people’s tendencies in arguments. On ‘cantankerous’ see VIII. 8 and Commentary. There is a certain malice in the remarks about people who ‘think they are clever’.

**157a1–5.** Confuse your opponent by hiding the premiss you want among a heap of useless questions. ‘Those who draw fake diagrams’ (*pseudographountes*) appeared earlier in I. 1, **101a5–17** (see the Commentary on that passage and Excerpt C). The fake-prover’s art rests on using diagrams that are not correctly drawn (e.g. certain lines shown to intersect cannot really do so, or lines claimed to be equal cannot be). This passage might be taken to suggest that outright deception forms part of the dialectician’s arsenal, since fake proofs are clearly deceptive. But the point Aristotle is stressing is that these impossible diagrams typically include large numbers of *irrelevant* lines, making it harder to see how the trick works. Likewise, says Aristotle, it is often possible to get an adversary to accept premisses buried in a mass of irrelevancies which he would never accept if put forward all alone (presumably because in the latter case it would be obvious what conclusion would follow). ‘The error’: the diagram used in a fake proof must contain some impossibility, which is obscured by adding many irrelevant lines. I take this phrase to apply only to the case of the fake proof. The irrelevant premisses he is recommending that one add to a dialectical argument obscure how the argument *works*, not how it *deceives*: an argument that is invalid but appears valid is not dialectical but contentious. ‘Surreptitiously’: the British idiom ‘in a hole-and-corner manner’ captures the sense of *en parabustōi* nicely, though it is meaningless to most North Americans.

**157a6–13.** ‘embellishment’: this term seems to indicate that induction and division are *merely* ornamental. But Aristotle regarded induction as an important form of argument (cf. I. 12), and indeed he returns to it at length in VIII. 2. Moreover, what he here calls division seems to be one of the four instruments of I. 13. His present characterization of them as ‘embellishments’ probably reflects the fact that his dialectical method is aimed primarily at finding deductive arguments for a conclusion. Induction and division will then be important, but only as subsidiary devices for establishing the premisses used in a deduction.

There may also be a veiled criticism of Plato’s concept of dialectic here. As Alexander notes in his commentary (I. 16–19), Plato defined the dialectician’s skill as consisting of the abilities to ‘make one into many’ (i.e. divide a genus into its species) and ‘make many into one’ (i.e. collect individuals into a species or species into a genus). Since the latter of these may be identified with the purpose of induction, it appears that Aristotle subordinates the two corner-stones of Platonic dialectic to the discovery of deductions, the centrepiece of his own method (that would harmonize with his harsh words about Platonic division in *An. Pr.* I. 31). But against this, Aristotle himself encapsulates dialectical skill with almost the same words at VIII. 14, **164b4–7** (see the Commentary on that passage).

**157a14–17.** The meaning of ‘clarity’ (*saphēneia*) is not entirely clear. Aristotle’s discussion suggests that examples and illustrations serve to make the hearer better understand what we mean. Since the rules of dialectic permit the answerer to say ‘I don’t understand’ (see **160a18–19**), these may be intended to forestall such complaints, but they may simply have the more general purpose of making the answerer understand (or at least think he understands).

‘from sources we know’: any educated Athenian would know by heart large portions of the Homeric poems, but the works of the epic poet Choirilos would hardly be so well known (a rough parallel: “‘as Shakespeare says”, not “as Albee says”’). Other translators (and Alexander) suppose Aristotle is first making the point that illustrations should be relevant and based on familiar things, then offering Homer’s poetry as exemplifying the right way, Choirilos’ as exemplifying the wrong. I think this is unlikely. The Choirilos referred to here is probably the fifth-century epic poet from Samos whom Aristotle cites once or twice—with approbation—in the *Rhetoric* (III. 14, 1415a3–4 and possibly 17–18). An Athenian decree ordered that Choirilos’ *Persica*, commemorating the Athenian victory over Xerxes, be included in public recitations of Homer (*Rhet.* 1415a17–18 may be the *Persica*’s first lines), and this juxtaposition might explain Aristotle’s choice of example. In any event, even if Choirilos did not enjoy Homer’s unique status, there is no basis for Tricot’s description of him as a ‘bad poet’. Perhaps Tricot confused him with the notorious Choirilos of Iasos.

### CHAPTER 2

**157a18–21.** Aristotle ‘discussed this earlier’ in I. 12 (induction is ‘more persuasive’ and ‘common to the public’, deduction is ‘more compelling’ and ‘more effective’ against *antilogikoi*); cf. also VIII. 14, **164a12–16**. Nothing here suggests that induction is merely an ornament.

**157a21–b33.** To understand these remarks concerning induction, we must keep in mind that an inductive argument will begin within a series of questions about cases:

Is $x_1$ F? (Yes)
.
.
Is $x_n$ F? (Yes)

After gaining these concessions, the questioner’s next step would be to ‘put the universal as a question’, that is, ask for the universal generalization which these cases support. This will introduce some second general term, G, of which $x_1$, etc., are instances:

Is every G F?

A respondent who has assented to all the cases is under an obligation to assent to the universal or provide a counter-example, if asked (Aristotle discusses the details below and in VIII. 8).

**157a21–33.** The first problem Aristotle discusses points up an important difference between his conception of inductive arguments and most modern accounts. The latter suppose that the particular cases take the form ‘$x$ is both G and F’, so that each already contains both universal terms. What the inductive step introduces is simply a universal quantifier. However, this is clearly *not* what Aristotle has in mind, since otherwise an induction could not even be stated without having a general term for all its cases. His cases have instead the form ‘$x$ is F’, and the inductive step introduces the second universal as well as the generalization. This second universal must pick out what it is that all the cases have in common. If we cannot find such a term, we can still ‘ask for the universal’, but our question must take the much less satisfactory form ‘Is every *such* thing F?’

Aristotle says that such anonymous generalizations should be avoided because they are too hard to deal with: lacking a universal which says what the various cases are cases of, questioner and answerer may fall into dispute about what counts as a similar case, and it will be possible for clever questioners (or answerers) to engage in cheating. Therefore, if no general term is available, we should coin one for the express purpose of covering the cases we want. This may seem to contradict his earlier discussion of ‘argument from likeness’ (**156b10–17**), which described the absence of an explicit universal generalization as the strong point of such arguments. However, he may be contrasting arguments in which a universal generalization is sought for its own sake with those in which it is sought only in order to infer from it one of its instances.

Compare Aristotle’s note of the utility of a study of likenesses to inductive arguments at I. 18, **108b7–12**. On coining names for unnamed universals, cf. *An. Post.* I. 5, 74a6–32; *An. Pr.* I. 35, I. 39. The assumed picture of induction is worth comparing with the notoriously problematic discussion in *An. Post.* II. 19, which also deals with the emergence of a universal from individual cases.

**157a23.** ‘common name’: since the names in question apply to ‘similarities’, not similar things, this most likely means ‘commonly accepted name’ rather than ‘common name for all cases’.

**157a27–9.** ‘hoodwink’ (*parakrouontai*): this verb is often used, in Aristotle or elsewhere, of deception by means of fallacious arguments (thus it is a close synonym of *paralogizesthai*). AT *SE* 1, 165a13–17, Aristotle uses it of people skilled in numerical calculations who cheat the unskilled (see also *Pol.* IV. 12, 1297a10).

‘some saying . . . others objecting’: judging by what follows, these alternatives probably refer to questioners and answerers respectively.

**157a30–3.** ‘similarly designated’ (*homoiōs legetai*): this idiom recalls *monachōs legetai*, ‘said in one way’, and its contrasting ‘said in many ways’. However, I do not see how the ambiguity of a term can be involved here. The problem is instead to determine whether the various cases of the induction fall under the same universal as the additional case we need to draw a conclusion about. Lacking a universal to characterize the similarity, this might be disputed, but once an appropriate term is coined those disputes are avoided. The point of the last sentence may be that cases which we at first think will fall under the same designation lose this similarity if we try actually to coin a single term to cover them all.

**157a34–b33.** An ‘objection’ (*enstasis*) is a counter-example to a generalization. As this section makes clear, the rules of dialectical exchanges permit a questioner to insist that an answerer who has conceded the cases of an induction either concede the generalization or provide a counter-example (‘ask for an objection’ is a technical term for the questioner’s demand for such a counter-example).

**157a34–7.** It is the questioner’s right to ask for counter-examples only in the specific case when the answerer has conceded the inductive steps but rejected the generalization. If the questioner simply asks ‘Is every F G?’ without a preceding objection, the answerer may say ‘No’ with no obligation to provide counter-examples. ‘Your right’: *dikaion* can simply mean ‘legitimate’, but the point here is to clarify the circumstances under which the questioner can require of the answerer something other than assent or dissent.

**157a37–b2.** The case presupposed by this further constraint on the answerer appears to be an induction followed by an inference to another instance: the answerer has conceded the cases and also conceded ‘Every G is F’ but now balks at the instance ‘$a$ is F’. It is not clear just what the constraint is, but the most plausible solution is that when confronted with the unwanted case, the answerer decides to retract his earlier assent to the universal and uses that very case as the objection. The rule then appears to be: you can only do this if this case is the *unique* exception to the general rule. On a narrower interpretation, ‘the very case proposed’ would refer to the thesis under discussion. The implicit rule would then be that the answerer could appeal to this way out only if that thesis concerned a unique exception.

**157b2–8.** The advice here, which is obvious enough, would be a natural instance of applying the counsels of Book I about studying multiple senses of terms so as to be able to disarm such equivocals in advance.

**157b8–33.** Finally, Aristotle considers how to deal with a *sound* objection to a generalization. Overall, the tactic is straightforward: add a condition to the generalization that will avoid the objection. Thus, we replace ‘Every G is F’ with ‘Every G which is H is F’, and continue in this manner until (if we are successful) the answerer concedes a premiss we can use.

**157b24–8.** If we follow Aristotle’s own claim that objections arise only in connection with inductions, then this passage must be recommending a means of forestalling objections. Evidently, the situation is this: the answerer has accepted the cases of an induction but refused the generalization. Before demanding an objection, the questioner then proposes instead a narrower generalization, subtracting a possible counter-example; this deprives the questioner of the example he was about to give, and he is therefore compelled to assent. Aristotle may have in mind deliberately choosing a generalization to which there is an obvious objection, then replacing it with a narrower generalization to throw the answerer off guard.

**157b28–30.** It seems not only obvious, but trivially so, that we cannot salvage a generalization by this kind of restriction unless it is indeed true in some cases and false in others. However, Aristotle may be supposing that these generalizations are stated (as are all his examples) without explicit quantification (thus making them all ‘indefinite’ in the terminology of the *An. Pr.* I. 1, 24a19–22 and *De Int.* 10). Statements of the forms ‘A is B’ or ‘As are Bs’ sometimes express universal generalizations (‘Dogs are mammals’), sometimes things true for the most part (‘Dogs make good pets’), and sometimes things true only sometimes (‘Dogs bite’). Thus, Aristotle may be advising us to take note of which type of statement is actually being made.

**157b31–3.** In view of the discussion in I. 10, this can hardly be intended as a definition of ‘dialectical premiss’. I suggest that Aristotle is thinking of what it is to *secure* or *obtain* a premiss in a dialectical argument: accepting a number of instances of a generalization and offering no objection just is to accept the generalization, in a dialectical context.

**157b34–158a2.** A number of difficulties arise concerning this brief passage. It will help to begin with a general picture of ‘argument through the impossible’ based on some of what Aristotle says elsewhere. He thinks of such an argument as consisting of two parts. One is the ‘deduction of an impossible’:

Premiss$_1$
.
.
Premiss$_n$
Assume that H
(argumentative steps)
Therefore, A (which is evidently impossible)

Given this deduction of an impossibility, we then conclude ‘through the impossible’ that H is false (see *An. Pr.* I. 44, 50a29–38; *An. Post.* I. 26).

This two-part conception forms the basis of Aristotle’s present advice. A straightforward (direct in modern terms) deduction of a conclusion stands on its own: once the respondent has accepted the premisses, nothing more is needed to establish the conclusion. However, in a deduction through the impossible we must obtain the further admission that the ‘impossible’ result deduced really is impossible, and this leaves room for the respondent to protest.

This points up an important difference between Aristotle’s way of understanding *reductio ad absurdum* argument and most modern conceptions. For Aristotle, the impossible result is simply an *obvious falsehood*: something which anyone would know to be false, or even something which the respondent has already agreed to be false. Thus, he says that arguments through the impossible resemble arguments from an assumption but differ in that no ‘prior agreement’ need be made since the falsehood of the impossibility deduced is obvious (*An. Pr.* I. 44, 50a32–8). By contrast, rules of *reductio ad absurdum* in modern formal systems typically specify that if from a set of premisses and an assumption H we can deduce a *self-contradictory* proposition (i.e. usually, a proposition of the form ‘P and not P’), then we may infer the denial of H. Aristotle does not indicate that impossibilities are restricted to logical falsehoods.

So described, argument through the impossible may be distinguished from two other notions. The first is indirect proof, which has the following structure:

Premiss$_1$
.
.
Premiss$_n$
$\sim$H (denial of the intended conclusion)
.
.
$\sim$(Premiss$_k$)
H

That is, if from a set of premisses and the denial of H we can deduce the denial of *one of the premisses*, then we may infer H. Examples of such arguments abound in Greek mathematics.

The second notion is something which Aristotle himself calls ‘converting’ (*antistrephein*) in VIII. 14 below. This is a process of transformation which derives one deduction from another. Suppose that the following is a valid argument:

$P_1$
.
.
$P_n$
___
C

Then if we replace *any* premiss $P_k$ by the denial of the conclusion $\sim$C and the conclusion by the denial of that premiss $\sim P_k$, the result is also a valid argument:

$P_1$
.
.
$\sim$C
.
.
$P_n$
___
$\sim P_k$

This ‘conversion’ is a much more abstract process than argument through the impossible, since it allows the transformation of one *argument* into another. It can be used to show that an entire class of arguments of one form is valid by showing how to transform each such argument into another known to be valid: this is exactly what Aristotle himself does repeatedly in the proofs of the validity of syllogistic forms in *An. Pr.* I. 1–22. It is not clear how Aristotle understood the relationships among these various procedures. In *An. Pr.* II. 8–10 he discusses ‘conversion’, and following this (*An. Pr.* II. 11–13) he discusses deduction through impossibility; for one account of the difference between the two see **61a18–27**.

‘When it is possible to deduce’: in the *Prior Analytics* Aristotle argues that any conclusion which can be reached by argument through the impossible can be reached without it, and *vice versa* (*An. Pr.* I. 29, 45a25–b11; II. 14, 62b38–63b21). Since these claims depend heavily on the theory of inference of *An. Pr.* I, which is generally not in evidence in the *Topics*, this might be taken as evidence that the *Topics* reflects an early stage in Aristotle’s development as a logician. However, it might equally well indicate that he is trying to keep logical theory to a minimum.

‘it makes no difference’: Waitz notes that this seems to be inconsistent with *An. Post.* I. 29, which argues that proof through the impossible is inferior, and takes this as evidence that the *Topics* reflects a relatively undeveloped stage of Aristotle’s thought. But it can also be argued that this *Posterior Analytics* text itself seems ignorant of the doctrines of the *Prior Analytics* (see Smith 1982, 1986); moreover, VIII. 14 shows Aristotle fully in command of the more abstract inferential procedure essential to the proofs of *An. Pr.* I. 1–22.

**158a3–6.** The first case seems identical with that mentioned above in **157a32–3**. Therefore, it is the second case which is probably being emphasized: an objection that the answerer will be hard put to think of is as good as no objection at all.

**158a7–13.** To judge from this passage, the questioner was allowed (perhaps even expected) to state the ultimate conclusion in an exchange rather than putting it as a question. These lines raise an important issue about dialectical argument. Forcing an opponent to a conclusion requires not simply getting that opponent to concede premisses which imply it but also getting the opponent to concede *that they imply it*: and what is to stop an adversary from simply denying that the conclusion follows? If only those opponents can be successfully refuted who agree that they have been refuted, then—paradoxically—slow-witted opponents will have a natural advantage; and what is to stop even clever ones from using this response? It may be that Aristotle supposes an audience to be present which can pass judgement on this point and award victory to the questioner. However, the phrase ‘to those who do not understand . . .’ might equally well mean that logically inexperienced audiences are sometimes taken in by this same device. We have, then, a sort of antithesis to the kind of contentious argument that appears to be valid but is not: an argument which actually is valid but does not appear to be so.

**158a14–24.** It is a basic rule of dialectical exchanges that the questioner must supply the premisses for assent or dissent: all that the answerer is required to do, except under certain defined circumstances, is to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Therefore, if the questioner needs something like a definition or a distinction of senses, he must formulate it for himself and try to get the answerer’s assent (compare here the examples in I. 4, **101b29–33**).

‘At the same time’: this suggests, if tentatively, yet another exception to the general restriction of answers to assent and dissent, namely, that an answerer who rejects a premiss stipulating the various senses of a term might be required to offer an alternative one.

**158a25–30.** ‘a long time presenting a single argument’: the verb I translate ‘present’ means ‘ask’, but dialectical arguments are always presented by asking questions; Aristotle is not only referring to asking the same *question* repeatedly but, generally, to spending excessive time on one argument. He outlines four possibilities. Either (i) the respondent is answering the questions, or (ii) he is not. If (i), then either (*ia*) the questioner is asking lots of different questions, or (*ib*) he is repeatedly asking the same question. But if (*ia*), he must have no argument, for no argument has a large number of premisses; and if (*ib*), he is rambling. In either case, it is clear that the questioner is doing a bad job. On the other hand, if (ii), then it is also clear that the questioner is doing a bad job because what he should do is either fault the answerer for not answering or abandon the argument.

The general principle that any very lengthy argument is bad (at least in dialectic) does not necessarily conflict with Aristotle’s earlier counsels about ‘stretching out’ an argument (**157a1–5**): there is a difference between a long argument and a *very* long argument.

‘Ramble’ (*adoleschein*): sometimes, this term denotes a specific error in argument (also called ‘saying the same thing twice’) illustrated in the following example. Suppose that we define ‘snub’ as ‘concave nose’; then, since we may always substitute a term’s definition for it, ‘snub nose’ becomes ‘concave nose nose’, which—so goes the complaint—is non-sense. But nothing of the sort is involved here. Elsewhere Aristotle uses *adoleschein* to mean ‘talk garrulously’, ‘chatter idly’ (*Rhet.* 1390a9, *EN* 1117b35).