### CHAPTER 6

**159b** **36** It is evident, then, what the answerer should aim at, whether the thing proposed is acceptable without qualification or to a certain person. But since everything asked must be either acceptable, unacceptable, or neither, and what is asked must be either relevant to **160a** the argument or not relevant to the argument, if it is acceptable and is not relevant to the argument he should grant it, saying that it is acceptable; if on the other hand it is not acceptable and is not relevant to the argument, then he should grant it but add the comment that it is not acceptable, so as not to appear simple-minded. If it is relevant to the argument and acceptable, then he **5** should say that it is acceptable but is too close to the initial thesis and that the thesis is refuted if it is conceded. And if the statement is relevant to the argument but too unacceptable, then he should say that the conclusion follows if this is conceded but that the proposal is too simple-minded. If it is neither unacceptable nor acceptable, then if it has nothing to do with the argument he should **10** grant it without making any distinction; if, on the other hand, it is relevant to the argument, he should add the comment that when it is conceded the initial thesis is refuted. For in this way, not only will the answerer appear not to suffer anything through his own fault, if he concedes each premiss foreseeing <what will follow>, but also the questioner will get his deduction, since everything more acceptable than the conclusion is conceded to him. But as for those who try to **15** deduce from things more unacceptable than the conclusion, they clearly do not deduce properly; accordingly, one should not concede what they ask.

### CHAPTER 7

**160a** **17** This is also how unclear and ambiguous questions should be met with. For since it is open to the answerer who does not understand to say ‘I do not understand’, and, if the question is ambiguous, not **20** necessarily to agree or disagree, it is first of all clear that, if what is said is not precise, he should not be reluctant to say he does not understand it: for it often happens that as a result of granting premisses not asked clearly, one is presented with something vexatious. If, on the other hand, it is intelligible but has many senses, then if what is said is true or false in all cases, he should grant or **25** reject it without qualification; but if it is false in one case and true in another, then he should indicate that it has many senses and that this one is false and that one true (for if he makes this distinction later, it will be unclear whether he also discerned the ambiguity in the beginning). But if he failed to see the ambiguity in advance and conceded with one of the senses in mind, **30** then he should tell a questioner who leads the argument towards the other sense, ‘I did not grant it with that sense in mind, but with the other one’: for if there are numerous things falling under the same word or argument, then dispute is easy. But if the question is both clear and unambiguous, then he should answer either ‘yes’ or ‘no’.

### CHAPTER 8

**160a** **35** Since every deductive premiss either is among those the deduction is from or is for the sake of one of these (and it is clear when someone is getting premisses for the sake of another, because of his asking for several similar cases—for it is either through induction or through similarity that people generally obtain universal premisses), the answerer should concede all particulars, so long as they are true and acceptable, but should try to bring an objection **160b** against the universal. For to impede the argument without either a real or an apparent objection is cantankerousness. So, if he does not grant the universal when it appears so in many cases, though he does not have an objection, it is evident that he is being cantankerous. Next, if he also cannot give any counter-attack showing that it **5** is not true, then all the more will he seem to be cantankerous. (But in fact not even this is sufficient. For we know of many arguments contrary to our opinions which it is difficult to solve—e.g. Zeno’s argument that it is not possible to move or to traverse the stadium—but that is no reason why one should not concede their **10** opposites.) Accordingly, if, though not able either to counterattack or to object, he does not concede, it is clear that he is being cantankerous. For cantankerousness in arguments is responding in a way—other than those mentioned—which is destructive of the deduction.

### CHAPTER 9

**160b** **14** To defend either a thesis or a definition, you should first work out **15** an attack on it for yourself. For it is clear that it is those things on the basis of which questioners refute the thesis that you should oppose.

Avoid defending an unacceptable thesis. (‘Unacceptable’ could have two meanings: it might mean either a thesis from which absurdities follow, e.g. if someone were to say that all things move or **20** that nothing does; or, it might mean what a bad character would choose and what is contrary to our wishes, e.g. that pleasure is the good or that doing wrong is better than suffering it.) For people will take you to be saying what you think, not defending something for the sake of argument, and hate you.

### CHAPTER 10

**160b** **23** As for arguments that deduce a falsehood, solve them by rejecting that because of which the falsehood comes about. For it is not the **25** case that the person who rejects anything whatever has solved it, not even if what is rejected is false. For an argument might contain several falsehoods, as for example if someone took as premisses that the person seated is writing and that Socrates is seated. For it follows from these that Socrates is writing. Now, when ‘Socrates is seated’ is rejected, the argument is no closer to being solved. And **30** yet the claim is false. But it is not as a result of this that the argument is false. For if someone happened to be sitting down but not writing, the same solution will no longer be appropriate for such a case. Consequently, it is not this premiss that should be rejected, but rather ‘the person seated is writing’ (for not every seated person is writing). Now, the person who rejects that because of which the falsehood comes about has certainly solved the argument, but it is the person who knows that the argument is by means **35** of this who knows the solution (as in the case of fake diagrams). For it is not enough to object, not even if what is rejected is false, but he must also demonstrate why it is false: this is how it will be evident whether or not he makes his objection with foresight.

**161a** There are four ways to hinder an argument from coming to a conclusion, as follows. An answerer can do so by rejecting that because of which the falsehood comes about, or by stating an objection to the questioner (for often he does not succeed in solv- **5** ing it, but yet the questioner is not able to carry it forward any further). Third is objecting to the questions asked. For it may result that what the questioner intends does not come about from the questions asked because they have been asked poorly, though when something else is added the conclusion does come about. So then, if the questioner can no longer lead the argument forward, then the objection would be against the questioner, whereas if he **10** can, it would be against the questions asked. The fourth and poor-est kind of objection is the one with respect to time: for some people raise the sort of objection that it would take longer to argue against than the present discussion allows. Objections, then, as we have said, come about in four ways. But only the first kind of **15** objection stated is a solution: the remainder are various hindrances and impediments of conclusions.

### CHAPTER 11

**161a** **16** A criticism of an argument just as an argument in itself is not the same as a criticism of it when it is put as questions. For the person questioned is often at fault for the argument not being argued well, because he will not agree to the premisses from which it would be possible to argue well against the thesis. For it is not in the power **20** of one participant alone to see that their common work is well accomplished. There are times, then, when it is necessary to attack the speaker, not the thesis—when the answerer is particularly abu-sive and ready to pounce on the questioner with the contrary of whatever he asks for. By being cantankerous, then, these people **25** make discussions competitive and not dialectical. In addition, since such arguments are for the sake of exercise and testing rather than instruction, it is clear that not only true but also false conclusions must be deduced, and not always by means of true premisses but sometimes also false ones. For it is often necessary for the person conducting the argument to refute when a truth has been supposed, **30** so that he must put forward falsehoods as premisses. And some-times, even when a falsehood has been supposed, he must refute it through falsehoods. For nothing prevents things that are not so from seeming more so to someone than the truth, so that if the argument comes about from what seems so to him he will more likely be convinced or benefited. And anyone who is to change minds well must change them dialectically, not contentiously—as **35** the geometer must do so geometrically—no matter whether the conclusion be false or true. (Which deductions are dialectical was stated earlier.) And since it is a poor participant who impedes the common work, so it is clearly also in an argument. For there is also a common project in these (except for competitive ones: in **40** these, it is not possible for both to achieve the same goal, for it is **161b** impossible for more than one to win.) It makes no difference whether one does this through answering or through questioning: for the person who questions contentiously argues poorly, and so does the answerer who will not grant what is evident or will not **5** understand what it is that the questioner means to get. So it is clear from what has been said that criticism should not be directed in the same manner at the argument in itself and at the questioner. For nothing prevents the argument being poor but the questioner hav-ing argued as well as possible with the answerer. For with cantan-kerous people, you simply may not be able to produce the **10** deduction you want, but only one that is possible. And since it is not determined when these people are taking contraries and when they are taking the original conclusions—for when making state-ments on their own, they often state contrary things and, having initially refused something, grant it later on; therefore, when they **15** are asked for contraries or for the initial thesis they often consent—poor arguments are bound to result. The guilty party is the an-swerer who does not grant something but then grants something else of that sort.

It is evident, then, that questioners and arguments should not be criticized in the same way.

There are five criticisms of an argument in itself. The first criti- **20** cism applies whenever, from the premisses asked, neither what was proposed nor anything else at all is concluded (the premisses used to get the conclusion being false or unacceptable, either all or most of them), and the conclusion does not come about either when some premisses are taken away, or when some are added, or when **25** some are taken away and others added. The second criticism ap-plies if the deduction is not about the thesis (and is from the sorts of premisses, and in the same way, as mentioned before). The third criticism applies if a deduction does come about with certain premisses added, but these are inferior to the ones asked for and less acceptable than the conclusion. Again, if one comes about with **30** certain premisses taken away (for sometimes more premisses are taken than those necessary, so that it is not in virtue of their being so that the deduction comes about). Next, if it is from premisses more unacceptable and less convincing than the conclusion. Or, if it is from premisses which are true but require more work to **35** demonstrate than the problem.

One should not expect the deductions of all problems to be equally acceptable and convincing. For just by nature, some things sought are easier and others harder, so that if <the questioner> has brought it to a conclusion from the most acceptable premisses possible, then he has argued well. It is evident, then, that the same **40** criticism also does not apply to an argument in relation to the problem under consideration and in itself. For nothing prevents the argument being worthy of blame in itself but praiseworthy in relation to the problem. Or again, conversely, (it may be) praise- **162a** worthy in itself but worthy of blame in relation to the problem—when it is easy to conclude it from many acceptable premisses, and even from true ones. Sometimes, an argument which comes to a conclusion might even be worse than an argument which does not—when the former is concluded from simple-minded premisses **5** (though the problem is not of that sort), the latter is in need of certain premisses which are acceptable and true, and the argument does not lie in these additional premisses.

It is not right to criticize arguments which conclude a truth through falsehoods. For a falsehood must always be deduced through falsehoods, but it is sometimes also possible to deduce a **10** truth through falsehoods. This is evident from the Analytics.

When the argument stated is a demonstration of something, then if there is something else not related in any way to the conclusion, it will not be a deduction about that; and if it should appear to be, then it will be a sophism, not a demonstration.

[A ‘philosopheme’ is a demonstrative deduction, an ‘epichei- **15** reme’ is a dialectical deduction, a ‘sophism’ is a contentious deduction, and an ‘aporeme’ is a dialectical deduction of a contradiction.]

If something is proved from premisses both of which appear to be so, but not to the same degree, then nothing prevents what is proved from appearing so more than either of the premisses. But if **20** one premiss should seem so and the other should be indifferent, or if one should seem so and the other should seem not so, then if these are to the same degree, <the conclusion> would be equally believed as disbelieved; but if one of these is to a greater degree, <the conclusion> will follow the one that is greater.

**25** And then there is this error in deductions: when someone proves through longer steps though it could be done through fewer ones which are actually present in the argument. Suppose e.g. that to prove one opinion is more so than another, a questioner were to argue: ‘Each thing itself is such to the highest degree; there is a truly opinable itself; thus, it will be so to a higher degree than the particular opinables; that which is so called in relation to the more **30** so is more so; there is a true opinion itself, which will be more precise than the particular opinions.’ But he asked for the premisses that there is a true opinion itself and that each thing itself is such to the highest degree. Consequently, this opinion is a more precise opinion. But what is the fault? Surely, that that on which the argument rests makes us overlook the cause.